
===== PAGE 1 =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 13 September 2019
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2019.00579
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
Edited by:
Elizabeth A. Fulton,
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and
Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO), Australia
Reviewed by:
Kate Barclay,
University of Technology
Sydney, Australia
Christopher James Brown,
Grifﬁth University, Australia
*Correspondence:
Blair J. W. Greenan
blair.greenan@dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Global Change and the Future Ocean,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Marine Science
Received: 30 April 2019
Accepted: 30 August 2019
Published: 13 September 2019
Citation:
Greenan BJW, Shackell NL,
Ferguson K, Greyson P , Cogswell A,
Brickman D, Wang Z, Cook A,
Brennan CE and Saba VS (2019)
Climate Change Vulnerability of
American Lobster Fishing
Communities in Atlantic Canada.
Front. Mar. Sci. 6:579.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2019.00579
Climate Change Vulnerability of
American Lobster Fishing
Communities in Atlantic Canada
Blair J. W. Greenan 1*, Nancy L. Shackell 1, Kiyomi Ferguson 1, Philip Greyson 1,
Andrew Cogswell 1, David Brickman 1, Zeliang Wang 1, Adam Cook 1,
Catherine E. Brennan 1 and Vincent S. Saba 2
1 Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Bedford Institute of Oceanogra phy, Dartmouth, NS, Canada, 2 NOAA National Marine
Fisheries Service, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory , Northeast Fisheries Science Center, Princeton Universit y
Forrestal, Princeton, NJ, United States
Climate change impacts on ﬁsheries will undoubtedly have so cio-economic impacts on
coastal communities and the seafood market. However, it is a challenge to integrate
climate change information in a form that can be used efﬁcien tly by adaptation planners,
policy makers, and ﬁshery managers. In this study, we frame a climate change impact
assessment using a geographical perspective based on the ma nagement units of the
dominant ﬁshery, in this case, American lobster in Nova Scot ia, Canada. The information
considered here includes economic dependence on the ﬁshery, population size, diversity
of the ﬁshery revenue, status of harbor infrastructure, tot al replacement cost of each
harbor, increased relative sea level and ﬂooding, and the vu lnerability of offshore lobster
to ocean warming and changes in zooplankton composition and anticipatory changes in
ﬁshery productivity across management borders. Using two o cean models to provide
multi-decadal scale projections of bottom temperature, ch anges in offshore lobster
distribution are projected to have a neutral, or positive im pact on the region as a
whole. However, when lobster vulnerability is combined wit h climate change related
vulnerabilities of coastal ﬁshing communities, it is evide nt that adaptation planning is
needed for long-term sustainability. This impact assessme nt provides both a framework
and information for further in-depth analyses by climate ch ange adaptation planners and
ﬁshery managers.
Keywords: climate change, lobster, thermal habitat, coastal vulnerability, harbor infrastructure, climate
projections, ﬁshery management
INTRODUCTION
Globally, coastal regions and communities have been identi ﬁed as particularly vulnerable to
climate change. This is recognized in Canada in the Pan-Cana dian Framework on Clean Growth
and Climate Change (https://www.canada.ca/en/services/e nvironment/weather/climatechange/
pan-canadian-framework.html). Hence, there is a need to ada pt and build resilience in these
communities so that they are adequately prepared for climate r isks like coastal ﬂooding, extreme
weather events, and shifting ﬁsh populations. The Government o f Canada has recently appointed
a Minister of Rural Economic Development with the primary goal of creating a Canadian Rural
Economic Development Strategy. At the provincial level in Nov a Scotia, a goal was set to double
===== PAGE 2 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
the value of exports (relative to a 2012 baseline) from the
ﬁsheries (including aquaculture) and the agricultural sec tors
on a sustainable basis by 2024 (https://onens.ca/goals/goa l-15-
ﬁsheries-and-agriculture-exports/). The determination o f this
sustainability will be contingent upon accounting for the im pacts
of climate change on the ﬁsheries and ﬁshing communities.
Ocean temperatures on the continental shelves oﬀ the
Northeast USA and southern Atlantic Canada have increased
over the past half century (
Jewett and Romanou, 2017; Greenan
et al., 2018b ), consistent with the global trend of increasing
ocean heat content resulting from climate change ( Cheng et al.,
2017). The resulting biological impacts vary both regionally
and by species ( Fogarty et al., 2007; Wernberg et al., 2011;
Pinsky and Fogarty, 2012; Shackell et al., 2014; Stortini et al.,
2015, 2017; Kleisner et al., 2016, 2017 ). As warming continues,
conditions may become uninhabitable for some species while
others may ﬂourish (
Sorte et al., 2010 ). These long-term changes
can have a major impact on commercial ﬁsheries if waters become
unsuitable for species of economic importance and range shift s
lead to a decrease in local abundance ( Fogarty et al., 2007 ).
Alternatively, an area may experience a change in abundance
of certain species if warming improves habitat suitability
(
Fogarty et al., 2007; Sorte et al., 2010; Shackell et al., 201 4;
Stortini et al., 2015).
American lobster ( Homarus americanus ) is Canada’s most
valuable ﬁshery ($1.3 B in 2016), and contributed 44% of the
total commercial value of all ﬁsheries in Atlantic Canada in 2016
(
DFO, 2018 ). Lobster landings have been trending upward in
recent decades among the 45 directed ﬁsheries in the Atlanti c
provinces and Quebec ( Bernier et al., 2018 ). Many small rural
communities in Atlantic Canada rely heavily on lobster for t heir
economic well-being, although snow crab ( Chionoecetes opilio )
is important in the colder northeast region ( Figure 1). Ocean
temperatures above an optimal thermal range can reduce lobste r
survival, growth, and reproduction as a result of stress, dec reased
recruitment, and increased disease ( Aiken and Waddy, 1986;
ASMFC, 2015). The scale and characteristics of lobster response
to warming varies across its range (Boudreau et al., 2015). Lobster
abundance in the Gulf of Maine was at record high in 2015
(
ASMFC, 2015) where the lobster industry has initially beneﬁtted
from a loss of lobsters’ predators, warming bottom temperatur e
(Boudreau et al., 2015 ) as well as strong conservation measures
(Le Bris et al., 2018 ). In contrast, lobsters are declining in the
warmer southern New England where conservation measures are
fewer (Le Bris et al., 2018 ).
The observed boom in the Gulf of Maine may not be
permanent given that warming-induced changes in molting and
timing of migration have extended the ﬁshing season while
increasing the number of individuals eligible to the ﬁshery and
may lead to over-ﬁshing (
Mills et al., 2013 ) alongside a declining
Abbreviations: BNAM, Bedford Institute of Oceanography (BIO) North Atlantic
Model; CIVI, Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Index; CM2. 6, N OAA
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory’s Climate Model 2.6; DFO, De partment
of Fisheries and Oceans; ESI, Exposure Sub-Index; ISI, Infrastru cture Sub-Index;
LFA, Lobster Fishing Area; LVI, Lobster Vulnerability Index; NO AA, National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration; SCH, Small Craft Habors ; SESI,
Socio-Economic Sub-Index; SVD, Species V alue Diversity.
trend in young of year in the Gulf of Maine and Georges
Bank since 2012 (
Carloni et al., 2018 ). While ocean temperature
change and ﬁshing pressure are important factors impacting
lobster distributions, the processes, and interactions that occur at
early life cycle stages are also highly relevant. Recently hatc hed,
planktonic lobster spend the ﬁrst 6–10 weeks of life in near-
surface waters, during which planktonic organisms make up th e
bulk of lobster diets (
Lawton and Lavalli, 1995; DFO, 2009 ). In
the Gulf of Maine, a correlation has been identiﬁed between
the abundances of post-larval and young-of-year lobster, an d the
copepod species Calanus ﬁnmarchicus, suggesting a link between
the declining trend in lobster recruitment and deviations i n
zooplankton assemblages in this region (
Carloni et al., 2018 ).
As ocean temperatures warm and habitat suitability decrease s
in some areas, ensuring that management and ﬁshing practices
regionally are tailored to support the future of the stock can he lp
moderate the eﬀects of ocean warming (
Le Bris et al., 2018 ).
In this paper, we present an analysis of coastal vulnerabilities
to climate change (physical environment, socio-economic,
and infrastructure), alongside potential responses of adjac ent
lobster populations given increased ocean temperatures. This i s
performed at the management unit scale as a means to identifying
variation between regions, and where/how preparation for
investment and/or adaptation strategies may be beneﬁcial in
boosting local resiliency to future changes (
Colburn et al., 2016 ).
Our analysis of the projections for the lobster ﬁshery is a ﬁrst
step in considering this information in local ﬁshery manage ment
decisions and longer term economic development strategies.
DATA AND METHODS
Providing climate change adaptation tools that integrate ch anges
in the physical environment with ﬁsheries response and
the potential socio-economic impacts presents a signiﬁcant
challenge. However, such tools are needed by adaptation
planners, policy makers, and ﬁshery managers. In the case of
ﬁshery managers, they generally make decisions at the scale o f
the stock management unit as opposed to the entire range of the
species. The approach adopted in this paper is to generate two
climate change vulnerability indices (one for coastal communities
and one for lobster) and then aggregate this information at t he
scale of ﬁshery management units ( Figure 2).
In the ﬁrst case, the Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Index
(CIVI) will provide a measure of the relative vulnerability of
DFO Small Craft Harbor (SCH) locations to climate change
(
Cogswell et al., 2018; Greenan et al., 2018a ). The lobster
ﬁshery in Nova Scotia is supported by an extensive network
of coastal infrastructure, which is a nationwide SCH program
responsible for the maintenance of more than 1,000 harbors
with infrastructure (e.g., wharves, breakwaters, buildin gs) valued
at approximately $5.6 billion. While the harbors are locally-
operated and managed by not-for-proﬁt Harbor Authorities,
the SCH program provides the property, infrastructure, liabili ty
insurance, and budget for major and minor repairs. These
harbors are critical to the ﬁshing industry and the economy o f
rural coastal communities in Canada.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 3 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
FIGURE 1 | Value of ﬁsheries landings associated with each Lobster Fish ing Area (LFA) in the Maritimes Region of Fisheries and Ocean s Canada (DFO). Landings are
reported at the community level, and aggregated at the level of LFA. The size of pie charts in each LFA is scaled by the total value of landings and the proportions
presented for lobster, snow crab and all other species. DFO S mall Craft Harbor locations are represented by the black dot s.
While CIVI is comprised of exposure (natural forces),
infrastructure, and socio-economic indicators, it does no t
incorporate biological impacts of climate change. In the seco nd
part of the analysis, a species vulnerability index will be
calculated as a function of exposure (gain/loss in suitable habitat)
and sensitivity (measures of abundance, potential, and food
availability) (
Stortini et al., 2015, 2017 ), based on projections of
change in suitable habitat ( Shackell et al., 2014 ). The objective of
this paper is to integrate relevant information at the spatial s cale
of a stock. The result is a Climate Change Impact Assessment
by Fishery Management Units ( Figure 2), and this highlights
spatially distinctive characteristics in vulnerability an d identiﬁes
needs for customized adaptation planning (
Colburn et al., 2016).
Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Index
The Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Index (CIVI) was
developed as a national-scale adaptation tool for SCH to provid e
a numerical indicator of relative vulnerability that incor porated
the eﬀects of climate change (
Greenan et al., 2018a ). This
vulnerability index was designed with three component sub-
indices: Exposure (natural forces), Infrastructure, and So cio-
economics. Each of the sub-indices incorporates three to ﬁve
component variables which were scored on a 1–5 scale (least
vulnerable to most vulnerable) depending on the harbor’s
vulnerability to that particular variable. The scoring is a r elative
measure for the variable over the geographical area of this
study. Most of the variables are scored objectively using the
methodology described in this section, however, some varia bles
required expert judgment and, in those cases, we have provided
information on who undertook this assessment. A detailed
description of the criteria for scoring each of the variablesin CIVI
is provided in
Greenan et al. (2018a) . The individual sub-index
scores were calculated as the geometric mean of the constitue nt
variables (Cogswell et al., 2018 ) and the ﬁnal vulnerability index
is the geometric mean of the three sub-indices for each harbo r.
Exposure Sub-Index (ESI)
The Exposure Sub-Index includes ﬁve component variables:
relative sea level change, maximum wind speed, mean signiﬁca nt
wave height, coastal materials (shoreline type/susceptibil ity to
erosion), and change in sea ice duration.
Sea level change
For the Atlantic Canada region considered in this study, rela tive
sea level is rising (and is projected to continue to rise) fast er
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 4 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
FIGURE 2 | Flowchart of vulnerability indices, sub-indices, and comp onents that contribute to an overall climate change impact a ssessment by ﬁshery
management unit.
than the global rate, in part as a result of land subsidence due to
glacial isostatic adjustment ( Greenan et al., 2018b ). The relative
sea level change data were derived from the Intergovernment al
Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project, Phase 5 (
IPCC, 2014 ). Using
the IPCC RCP8.5 scenario, the change in relative sea level at
each SCH location was computed as the diﬀerence between the
projected mean water level in the year 2100 relative to 2010. T he
RCP8.5 scenario was used because it represents the high emission
scenario (i.e., business as usual, no mitigation of greenho use
gases) and so for planning purposes is a more conservative
option. This scenario is also consistent with the ocean clima te
model projections that were used for the lobster vulnerabili ty
analysis. The scoring of this variable is 1 (5) in the locations of the
study with the smallest (largest) projected relative sea lev el rise.
Wind and wave climate
A wind and wave climate for the Canadian coastline was
generated for the years 1990–2012 using wave model data
generated from the French Research Institute for Exploitatio n of
the Sea (IFREMER) wave hindcasts using the WA VEWATCH III
model (
Rascle et al., 2008; Rascle and Ardhuin, 2013 ) and wind
data from the National Centers for Environmental Predictio n
(NCEP) Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR) ( Saha et al.,
2010). Two high resolution (10 min) grids of Atlantic and
Paciﬁc maximum modeled wind speeds were used for southern
Canadian coastal areas while a coarser (30 min) worldwide
grid was used for the Arctic areas. From these datasets the
mean annual maximum wind speed and the mean maximum
signiﬁcant wave height were calculated. Future projections of
changes in the wind and wave climate along Canada’s coastline
have low conﬁdence at this point (
Greenan et al., 2018b ), so the
decision was made to use the present wind and wave climate. The
scoring of these variables is 1 (5) in the areas with the areas of the
study with the lowest (highest) wind speed and smallest (large st)
wave heights.
Sea ice
Sea ice data were acquired from the Canadian Ice Service
providing percent ice coverage for each week over four decades
(1970s through 2000s). For each decade, a single dataset was
calculated as the sum of all weeks with ice coverage in excess of
50% along the coastline, with a maximum possible score of 52
weeks for each decade. As a measure of change in ice duration
(number of weeks), the data from the 2000s was subtracted fro m
the 1970s. A positive number represented a reduction in weeks
of ice coverage, a negative number an increase in ice coverag e.
This variable is scored one (5) for the locations in the study area
that have experienced the smallest (largest) absolute changein the
number of weeks of ice coverage.
Coastal materials
The base layers from which the coastal materials layer was
derived were the Fulton surﬁcial geology (
Fulton, 1995) and the
Wheeler bedrock geology ( Wheeler et al., 1996 ), both at scales
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 5 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
of 1:25 million. At locations where the surﬁcial geology was
greater in thickness than veneer, a score of 3–5 was assigned ,
with 5 being most erodible (muds, marine clay, materials tha t
will ﬂow) and three being less erodible (sands, gravels). Wh ere
surﬁcial materials had the same thickness as veneer or less, the
bedrock geology was used as the basis for the score. Scores
based on bedrock geology were assigned 2 if the geology was
sedimentary, and 1 if igneous or metamorphic (G. Manson,
personal communication, 2015, Natural Resources Canada
(NRCAN), Bedford Institute of Oceanography, Dartmouth, NS,
B2Y 4A2).
Infrastructure Sub-Index (ISI)
A harbor’s vulnerability to the potential impacts of climate change
depends in large part on their ability to physically withstand
the forces associated with these impacts. Three variables we re
selected for the Infrastructure Sub-Index:
Harbor condition
This variable is based on the SCH engineering evaluation
of harbor condition, which incorporates each separate harbor
facility at the component level (e.g., breakwater, wharf, bu ilding)
and assigns a numerical score between 1 and 5 for vulnerabili ty.
This index is a weighted average of the score for the
individual components. For each harbor, the average of all th e
individual facility conditions are weighted against the ha rbor’s
replacement cost. The scoring of this variable was based on
the expert judgment of SCH Regional Engineers responsible for
maintenance of these facilities.
Degree of facility protection
The degree of facility protection is an assessment of the degr ee
to which a harbor is naturally protected or has manufactured
protection from storm surge, wind, and other natural forces. The
elements included in this assessment were: the basin, wharv es,
ﬂoats, shore protection, slipways, and breakwaters, but not
buildings, roads, or parking lots. The variable is a function of
the presence or absence of protective assets (such as breakwat ers
or natural topographical features) and their orientation (i. e.,
positioned such to withstand primary wave direction). This value
was assigned by SCH Regional Engineers with a low score (1)
for a fully enclosed harbor and a high score (5) for a completely
exposed harbor.
Total replacement cost
The value of infrastructure at a harbor can itself be an indic ation
of a harbor’s vulnerability to the impacts of climate change. The
larger the asset holdings at a harbor, the greater the opportun ity
for ﬁnancial losses in the event of a major weather event
associated with the exposure-related impacts of climate chan ge.
While the degree of facility protection provides an indicatio n
of the harbor’s ability to protect users and infrastructure f rom
the impacts of climate change, harbor facility replacement cost
provides an indication of the potential liabilities related t o major
ﬁnancial losses. This variable is scored 1 (5) for the harbor
infrastructure with the lowest (highest) replacement cost in the
region of this study.
Socio-Economic Sub-Index (SESI)
A Socio-Economic Sub-Index was developed to assess the
harbors’ economic vulnerability, as well as the harbors’ rol e
within the local economy. The Socio-Economic Sub-Index is
comprised of the following four variables:
Quantity landed per vessel
The quantity landed per vessel is derived from landings (kg)
divided by the number of vessel per harbor. The landings data
were retrieved from DFOs Integrated Catch and Eﬀort System.
The landings reported here are the aggregated record of landi ngs
of all species returned to a particular Small Craft Harbor over the
period of 2009–2013.
The number of vessels served by each harbor as port of landing
is an estimate of vessel activity by harbor for the purposes of
landing harvest from the ﬁsheries. This variable is diﬀerent from
the number of vessels using a speciﬁc harbor as home port.
Vessel activity of a Small Craft Harbor as the port of landing wa s
used in lieu of harbor as home port as it more reliably captures
the presence of economic activity at each harbor location. Th e
number of active vessels that landed harvest in each SCH location
was obtained from DFOs Integrated Catch and Eﬀort System. We
assume that landings at a particular harbor are associated with the
LFA closest to that harbor. This is not necessarily the case, but for
this analysis it is a reasonable assumption. This variable is s cored
1 (5) for the SCH locations in the study area they have the highest
(lowest) quantity landed per vessel.
Percent income from ﬁshing
Fishing income is aggregated at the level of the census subdivision
by the Canada Revenue Agency from the reported income
of the following four ﬁshing-related sectors: self-employed
ﬁsh harvesters, wage earning-ﬁsh harvesters, ﬁsh processin g
employees, and aquaculture employees. Only individuals who
reported a positive amount of income in any of these ﬁshing
sectors were included in the analysis. All other employment
income is considered non-ﬁshing income. The average ﬁshing
income by the census subdivision of each Small Craft Harbor
(2009–2013) was calculated as a percentage of total average
employment income. This socio-economic variable provides an
indicator of the weight of ﬁshing-related incomes in the cen sus
subdivision associated with the SCH location. This variabl e is
scored 1 (5) for the community surrounding each SCH facility
with the lowest (highest) percent income from ﬁshing in the
study area.
Population
The spatial area of Statistics Canada (StatsCan) census
subdivisions are too large to properly represent populations
associated with many SCH sites. Hence, the population
linked to SCH sites was assigned using the smaller StatsCan
geographical units of Population Centers, Dissemination Are as,
and Dissemination Blocks (largest to smallest). The process u sed
for assigning population to SCHs is as follows:
1. If a harbor falls in a Population Center (or within a distance
of 10 km), the population for that Population Center will
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 6 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
be assigned to the harbor (Population Center is a StatsCan
delineation used for municipal areas).
2. If a harbor has a population value at the level of a
Dissemination Block (smallest geographical unit in the
Census), that value is used.
3. If there is no population at the Dissemination Block level, t he
population value at the Dissemination Area level is used.
4. During quality control of the results, communities that w ere
assigned population values that were too large (based on
local knowledge of the region) were recalculated using the
sum of adjacent Dissemination Blocks instead of the larger
Dissemination Area.
This variable is scored 1 (5) for the communities surroundin g
the SCH facilities with the smallest (largest) populations in t he
study area.
Species value diversity
We refer to the diversity of ﬁshing revenue as an Species V alue
Diversity (SVD). We recognize that ﬁshing revenue is only
one aspect of economic diversity in coastal communities, but
it does provide a measure of whether communities depend on
the revenue from a few or several species. For this analysis,
Pielou’s evenness index (
Pielou, 1996 ) was used to compute
the SVD where values range from 0 to 1, with 1 representing
a community with similar sized proportions of landed value
($CAD) of each species. While measures of diversity typically use
species counts for their calculation, we opted to use landed va lue
for each species at each harbor as a proxy for species counts.
These values were then reclassiﬁed into ﬁve equal intervals and
redistributed to a range of 1–5 as has been done with other
CIVI variables. The outcome of this calculation is that the S VD
directly represents the capacity of ﬁshing communities to ada pt
to climate change impacts should they result in the failure of a
commercial ﬁshery.
Lobster Vulnerability Index Input: Habitat
and Zooplankton
The majority of lobster is ﬁshed in inshore areas, where insh ore
is deﬁned as waters up to 12 nautical miles from shore. The
only available data for modeling lobster habitat in the regi on
of this study is derived from regular research vessel (RV)
surveys, which do not sample inshore areas (see delineation on
Figure 1). Without inshore data, it is not possible directly predict
the inshore habitat suitability for lobster on the Scotian S helf,
but it is important to note that the RV oﬀshore survey often
serves as a proxy for lobster regional population dynamics and
habitat preferences (
Cook et al., 2017 ). In LFAs 27, 31A, 31B,
and 32 the lobster ﬁsheries are almost completely inshore, and
there are too many uncertainties and insuﬃcient informatio n
in trawl data to make reliable predictions in the oﬀshore in
these LFAs. In this study, a decision was made to limit the
analysis to projections in oﬀshore lobster habitat only. It w ill
not be possible to draw conclusions about the inshore areas on
the Scotian Shelf until geo-referenced lobster abundance d ata
become available.
Research Vessel Survey Data
Since the early 1960s and 1970s, respectively, the U.S. Nationa l
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
National Marine Fisheries Service and Fisheries and Oceans
Canada (DFO) have conducted seasonal and/or annual researc h
vessel (RV) bottom- trawl surveys to monitor the distributio n
and abundance of groundﬁsh in Northwest Atlantic waters.
These surveys range from Newfoundland and Labrador to
the Gulf of Maine, and include the Gulf of St. Lawrence
and the Bay of Fundy. For each trawl set, species presence,
abundance, and biomass are recorded along with several
ocean variables (temperature, salinity, depth, date, geogra phic
coordinates). To inform our species distribution model on
American lobster habitat preferences, we used presence, depth,
bottom temperature, season, and location data from a subset
of the RV survey data that includes data from: 1990 to 2016,
depths shallower than 450 m, temperatures below 19.5 ◦C, and
winter and summer months (January, February, March, July,
August, September).
Ocean Model Projections
In this study, we model oﬀshore habitat suitability and meas ure
exposure to climate change as the percent change in suitable
habitat availability given a projected increase in ocean bot tom
temperature from computer models for the months with RV
survey data. The two ocean models used in this study included
a regional ocean model that has high resolution in the region of
the Scotian Shelf and Gulf of Maine [BIO North Atlantic Model
(BNAM); (
Brickman et al., 2016 )], and a global climate model
[NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory’s Climate
Model 2.6 (CM2.6); (
Saba et al., 2016)].
The BNAM model is run in two basic modes: a hindcast
simulation from 1990–present, and future climate projections.
Output from the former has been applied to a number of
ecosystem related and ocean variability studies in Atlanti c
Canadian waters (
Brickman et al., 2015, 2018; Wang et al., 2016;
Shackell et al., 2019 ). The future climate predictions have been
used in studies of impacts on the marine ecosystem ( Lowen and
DiBacco, 2017; Stanley et al., 2018 ).
The BNAM provides simulated projections of ocean variables
for two future climate bi-decadal periods (2055: 2046–2065,2075:
2066–2085) using two IPCC AR5 scenarios, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5.
In this study, we use the bottom temperature output from the
2055 RCP8.5 model run as it provides the scenario most similar
to the CM2.6 doubled CO 2 experiment (
Meinshausen et al.,
2011). The BNAM model simulated the present day climate using
the Coordinated Ocean-ice Reference Experiments (CORE)
atmospheric forcing dataset (
Griﬃes et al., 2009 ). Forcing for
the future climate simulations was created by adding anomal ies
derived from six Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase
5 (CMIP5) Earth System Models to the present climate CORE
forcing for RCP8.5. A representation of the projected Greenlan d
glacier ice melt was also included in the simulations (
Brickman
et al., 2016 ). From these simulations, spatial ﬁelds representing
predictions of mean monthly diﬀerences in temperature between
the 2055 period and present climate were derived.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 7 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
The CM2.6 model projected ocean temperature change in
response to a 1% per year increase in atmospheric carbon
dioxide (CO 2) concentrations (
Saba et al., 2016 ). This model
was initialized using present day ocean conditions, a 100
year spin up under pre-industrial (1860) atmospheric CO 2
concentration levels (
Saba et al., 2016 ). After the initialization
period, atmospheric CO 2 concentrations were increased by 1%
each year for 70 years (with CO 2 doubling at 70 years and then
remains ﬁxed for 10 more years). A parallel control simulatio n
was run for which after the initialization, CO 2 concentrations
were ﬁxed to pre-industrial (1860) levels for 80 years. To calculate
the change in temperature, control simulation years were
subtracted from the corresponding projection months years,
producing 80 years of monthly temperature change projections.
In our analysis, we used the average of years 61–80 as our
temperature change values.
Plankton Monitoring Data
The American Lobster has a complex lifecycle throughout whic h
their diet and habitat needs change. During their planktonic
stage, they inhabit near-surface waters where they complete three
molts by feeding mostly on other planktonic organisms (
DFO,
2009). C. ﬁnmarchicus is biomass dominant in the zooplankton
assemblages in this region of the northwest Atlantic ( Reed et al.,
2018). Since phytoplankton are the primary source of nutrients
for C. ﬁnmarchicus , their lifecycle is highly dependent on the
timing and magnitude of seasonal blooms. Therefore, shifts in
the spatial and temporal components of the bloom are highly
relevant to C. ﬁnmarchicus distributions and abundances (
Record
et al., 2019a,b; Staudinger et al., 2019 ). Shifts in C. ﬁnmarchicus
abundance can also lead to timing mismatches for migratory
species and reduced availability of anticipated food (
Record
et al., 2019b; Staudinger et al., 2019 ). In recent years, this has
been observed among the North Atlantic right whale ( Eubalaena
glacialis) whose diet consists primarily of copepods ( Brennan
et al., 2019 ) and is correlated with ﬁsh and lobster recruitment
(Perretti et al., 2017; Carloni et al., 2018 ).
To incorporate biological interactions and prey availabilit y
into the assessment of stock status, C. ﬁnmarchicus abundance
data were compiled from the DFO Atlantic Zone Monitoring
Program (AZMP), and the spatial abundance was simulated by
a coupled bio-physical model (
Brennan et al., 2019 ). The AZMP
characterizes oceanographic variability through measurements of
temperature, salinity, nutrients, chlorophyll, and zooplank ton.
Seasonal opportunistic sampling occurs along set sections
of the Scotian Shelf, but bi-weekly sampling also occurs at
easily accessible ﬁxed sites, and also incorporates ocean da ta
collected by other monitoring programs such as ﬁsheries surveys.
Zooplankton samples are collected through ring net vertical t ows
from near-bottom to surface waters. These samples are split in
half, one to determine wet–dry weight, the other is subsampled
to identify and count taxa. To represent early life stage food
availability in this analysis, we use AZMP C. ﬁnmarchicus Scotian
Shelf data (individuals per m2) collected from consistently
sampled months (April, September, and October) between the
years 1999 and 2018.
Lobster Vulnerability Index Formulation
In the context of climate change, the vulnerability of a specie s
balances on the extent of the exposure, the population’s sensitivity
to this exposure, and its ability to adapt to the associated cha nge
(
IPCC, 2014). In vulnerability assessments, exposure, sensitivity,
and adaptive capacity are quantiﬁed using combinations of
multiple variables, with speciﬁc application to human systems
(
IPCC, 2014 ). In the analysis for this study, sensitivity and
adaptive capacity have been grouped into a single category “stock
status, ” which is typical for vulnerability assessments for n atural
systems (Stortini et al., 2015; Hare et al., 2016 ).
The Lobster Vulnerability Index formula consisted of two
sub-indices: exposure and stock status. Exposure consisted of
the percent change in suitable habitat for American lobster
in response to projected changes in bottom temperature from
the two ocean climate model projections, and stock status
was comprised of four component variables: potential suitable
habitat, occupancy, abundance status, and early life stage
food availability. The gain/loss of suitable habitat per lobs ter
ﬁshing area (LFA) is computed and then combined with stock
status within each LFA to arrive at a vulnerability index that
represents regional vulnerability to climate-related chang es in
American lobster habitat. The Lobster Vulnerability Index per
LFA will be analyzed in combination with Small Craft Harbor
vulnerability indices to characterize an LFA ’s overall vulnerability
to climate change.
Habitat Exposure
For this study, exposure is deﬁned as the percent change
in suitable habitat for American lobster between current an d
projected temperature scenarios. Note that this is diﬀerent fro m
the Exposure sub index used in CIVI that represents natural
forces that can act on infrastructure. Using the mgcv package
(
Wood, 2004, 2017 ) available for R statistical programming, a
generalized additive model (GAM) was used to measure habitat
suitability across our study region. On a scale from 0 to 1,
the habitat suitability model predicts the likelihood of a spec ies
being present at a location, based on the distributions of know n
presence and absence locations across the range of environmental
conditions. The GAM was selected using a forward stepwise
procedure, and comparing the Akaike information criterion
(AIC) and Analysis of V ariance (ANOV A) diagnostics (
R
Core Team., 2018 ). The model with the lowest AIC, lowest
residual deviance and highest deviance explained, served as
the null model before adding a new variable. The ﬁnal model
incorporated bottom temperature and depth as thin plate splines,
longitude and latitude as a tensor product with an exponential
spatial correlation, and season and year as factors.
To quantify exposure per LFA, three versions of the same
model were run, one for each temperature scenario (current:
associated with the RV survey data, future: BNAM, and CM2.6)
while holding all other variables constant. For each temperat ure
scenario, the model was run 100 times using a random selection
of 85% of the data, habitat suitability was assigned back to
each survey point, and to visually represent the results a habi tat
suitability map was interpolated using inverse distance weighting.
To calculate exposure, for each temperature scenario, survey
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 8 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
points were grouped by LFA and then the percentage of the data
that received a habitat suitability score >0.3 was calculated (
Cook
et al., 2017). The percent gain/loss was computed by diﬀerencing
the current estimate with each of the projected temperature
change scenarios.
Stock Status
Stock status was calculated as a function of potential suitab le
habitat, occupancy, abundance status, and early life stage fo od
availability. We measured potential suitable habitat as thepercent
of the total surveyed LFA area that is suitable (area >0.3
suitability/total surveyed LFA area) when habitat suitabi lity is
modeled excluding location. For occupancy, the realized sui table
habitat was calculated the same way, but included longitude and
latitude in the model, and then divided realized suitable ha bitat
by potential suitable habitat to arrive at an occupancy ratio. Low
numbers suggest that there is a lot of unused suitable habita t
while high numbers suggest that high occupancy in suitable areas
is leading to population growth in less suitable areas. Finall y, for
abundance status we computed the 5 year (2013–2016, inclusiv e)
mean weight of landings (a proxy abundance index) and divided
this by the maximum of the time series. The resulting value
represented recent landings as a percent of the highest in the
time series, if landings are currently peaking, this value wo uld
be 100. There was an exception for LFAs 37, 40, and 41 where
we used the RV survey values for landings estimates because L FA
37 is a shared area between LFA 36 and 38. LFA 40 is closed to
lobster ﬁsheries, and LFA 41 is a total allowable catch contr olled
lobster area.
Finally, for early life stage food availability, we combine d two
values: mean C. ﬁnmarchicus abundance per LFA, and the trend
in abundance. The trend was deﬁned as the percent change in
mean abundance (individuals per m2) in AZMP surveys between
the periods of 1999–2009 and 2010–2018 using only data from
consistently sampled months (April, September, and October).
LFAs that did not contain survey stations were assigned valu es
from the nearest neighboring LFA. Data were divided into two
time periods corresponding to the shift circa 2010 in right
whale migration patterns (
Brennan et al., 2019 ). As Calanus
spp. are the main prey of right whales, this likely represents
an upper trophic level response to the documented changes
circa 2010 in the zooplankton community in the northwest
Atlantic shelf (
Devine et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2018; Meyer-
Gutbrod et al., 2018 ). Mean abundance per LFA was calculated
from a coupled bio-physical model prediction of the spatial
distribution of average May-November 2008 C. ﬁnmarchicus late
stage abundance (copepodite stages CV and CVI) on the eastern
Canadian shelf (
Brennan et al., 2019).
Scoring Matrix
We factored the sub-indices and component variables into 1–5
scores using intervals that were based on the potential range for
each variable (Table 1). The ﬁnal stock status score was calculated
using the geometric mean of the four component variables.
The vulnerability assessment used a 5 × 5 matrix to describe
the relation between exposure and stock status, and assigned
vulnerability scores to American lobster per LFA (Table 2). In the
TABLE 1 | Deﬁnitions of the bins used to factor indicators into scores t hat range
from 1 to 5 (SH, suitable habitat).
Score Percent change (%) Potential
SH (%)
Occupancy
(ratio)
Abundance
status (%)
1 Maximum gain
(> +25)
>80 – 100 >1.5 100 +
2 Some gain (5 – 25) >60 – 80 >1 – 1.5 75 – <75
3 No change ( +/−5) >40 – 60 >0.5 – 1 50 – <75
4 Nome loss (5 – 25) >20 – 40 >0 – 0.5 25 – <50
5 Maximum loss ( > -25) 0 – 20 0 0 – <25
TABLE 2 | Vulnerability assessment scoring matrix.
1 2 3 4 5
1–signiﬁcant gain ( >25) 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
2–some gain (5–25) 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
3–no change ( +/−5) 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
4–some loss ( −25 to −5) 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
5–Signiﬁcant loss (>-25) 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Rows represent exposure scores (gain/loss in suitable habitat availabil ity), and columns
represent stock status scores. White represents neutral vulnerability, darkening shades
of red represent increasing vulnerability, and darkening shades of blue represent
decreasing vulnerability.
matrix, exposure ranged from maximum gain (1) to maximum
loss (5) in suitable habitat, and stock status ranged from st rong
(1) to weak (5).
If exposure is low and stock status is strong, vulnerability
will be low, and if exposure is high and stock status is weak,
vulnerability will be high. However, some combinations of
exposure and stock status can be assigned similar vulnerabili ty
scores. An area with high exposure and weak stock status will
be scored similarly to a place with low exposure and strong
stock status. Because of this, mid-ranged vulnerability sco res will
require deeper analysis should a more detailed understanding be
required. Additionally, when suitable habitat is gained in areas
where it is currently relatively scarce, a small absolute ga in can
lead to a large percent gain, while large spatial gains in areas
with high existing availability of suitable habitat will ha ve more
muted percent gains. Similarly, when starting points for stoc k
status indicators are low, this can be interpreted as a populati on
under stress, or the absence of an established population (whi ch
we parallel with uncertainty). We assessed that in both of
these scenarios, weak stock status scores are justiﬁed, and f or
interpretation, the nature of the stock status can be deduced from
the known footprint of the ﬁshery and population.
RESUL TS
Future Climate Simulations From T wo
Ocean Models
The future climate simulations from the two ocean models hav e
been used to produce projections of lobster vulnerability in
Atlantic Canada. These species distribution models projected
similar spatial patterns of habitat suitability for American
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 9 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
lobster. This is encouraging given the diﬀerent methods the
two models use to simulate future climates, and supports
the use of CM2.6—a global climate model–in similar studies
across pan-Canadian waters and elsewhere. The similarity in
spatial pattern can be attributed to the high resolution of
the models—something that is required to correctly simulat e
ocean variability and circulation in this region (
Brickman
et al., 2018 ). The diﬀerence in intensity of the species
distribution model responses can be directly related to larg er
bottom temperature changes predicted by the CM2.6 model
(see Figure S1).
Lobster Response to Projected Climate
Change
Current habitat suitability is higher and more widespread in
the western waters of Nova Scotia, including the Bay of Fundy
and Browns Bank, and is moderate throughout the Gulf of
Maine and on the outer part of the Scotian Shelf from ∼62 to
∼65◦ W (Figure 3). By mid-century, both future climate model
scenarios project an increase and expansion of habitat suitab ility
(Figure 3). While the spatial pattern of change in suitability
is similar using both ocean climate models, the suitability
trend was more pronounced under the CM2.6 temperature
change projections.
The absolute and percent change in projected habitat
suitability between the current conditions and the two
future scenarios demonstrates similar increases in most LF As
(Figure 4). For both scenarios, despite suitability remaining
high, there is a decrease in suitability in LFA 35 (Bay of Fund y),
suggesting that these waters will begin to warm beyond optima l
temperatures by mid-century ( Figure 4). For both scenarios,
habitat suitability in LFAs 34, 38, and 40 increases consider ably.
In general, the projected change is larger for CM2.6 than BNAM,
with a larger range of both increase and decrease in habitat
suitability in some areas including LFAs 33 and 41 ( Figure 4).
However, for LFAs 41 and 33, the gains outweigh the loss, whic h
leads to a net gain in habitat suitability.
The percent increase in suitable habitat per LFA (exposure)
for the two future scenarios yielded similar patterns, with
CM2.6 projecting consistently higher gains ( Figure 5). LFA 33
is projected to experience a large percent increase, more than
doubling the habitat suitability in the CM2.6 scenario and almost
doubling in the BNAM scenario. This is because the current
habitat suitability in this LFA is quite low, and the increas e in
habitat suitability, although relatively small compared to other
FIGURE 3 | Current and projected habitat suitability maps for America n lobster (Homarus americanus), based on measured and projected ocean temperatures.
Habitat suitability is measures on a 0–1 scale, where 0 = low likelihood of the species being present and 1 = a high likelihood of species presence. (A) Reference map
with Lobster Fishing Areas (LFAs) labeled. (B) Current prediction for habitat suitability distribution m odeled using temperature, depth, season, year, and locatio n from
research vessel (RV) survey data. (C) Habitat suitability modeled using the same formula as the cu rrent prediction, but projected temperatures from the BNAM ocean
forecast model instead of measured temperatures. (D) Habitat suitability modeled using the same formula as the cu rrent prediction, but projected temperatures from
the CM2.6 ocean forecast model instead of measured temperat ures. The black dashed line along the coast of Nova Scotia del ineates the extent of the inshore ﬁshery
where no data are available.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 10 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
FIGURE 4 | Spatial changes in habitat suitability for American lobste r (Homarus americanus) given projected ocean temperature changes from two scenar ios. Habitat
suitability is measures on a 0–1 scale, where 0 = low likelihood of the species being present and 1 = a high likelihood of species presence. (A) Percent change in
habitat suitability between current and CM2.6 temperature change projections. (B) Percent change in habitat suitability between current and B NAM temperature
change projections. (C) Absolute change in habitat suitability between current and CM2.6 temperature change projections. (D) Absolute change in habitat suitability
between current and BNAM temperature change projections. (E) Change in median habitat suitability per LFA. Bars show the d istribution of median habitat suitability
per LFA from 100 model iteration. The black dashed line along the coast of Nova Scotia delineates the extent of the inshore ﬁshery where no data are available.
LFAs (34, 38, and 40), is large relative to its starting point
(Figure 5). Percent gains in LFAs 34, 38, 40, and 41 were
considerable, and negligible in LFAs 35, 36, and 37. LFA 33
is located between LFAs 34 (with considerable gain) and 32
(presently with no oﬀshore lobster ﬁshery). The substantial gain
in LFA 33, may represent the edge of a range shift, where habita t
suitability is increasing northeast as temperatures warm.
Using the scoring matrix described in Section Scoring matri x,
we assigned vulnerability scores to each LFA. For both projec ted
temperature change scenarios, the vulnerability scores were
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 11 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
FIGURE 5 | Percent change (gain or loss) in suitable habitat availabil ity for American lobster ( Homarus americanus). Habitat suitability is measures on a 0–1 scale,
where 0 = low likelihood of the species being present and 1 = a high likelihood of species presence. A location was consid ered suitable if its habitat suitability score
from the model output was >0.3 and distributions were created by calculating percent c hange between current and projected temperature change sce narios, per
Lobster Fishing Area (LFA) based on 100 model iterations. (A) Percent change in suitable habitat availability given the B NAM temperature change scenario. (B)
Percent change in suitable habitat availability given the C M2.6 temperature change scenario.
FIGURE 6 | Vulnerability sub-indices by Lobster Fishing Area (LFA). B oxplots show the distribution of index scores within each LF A: the colored boxes represent the
interquartile range (the middle 50% of scores), the horizon tal line represents the median score, points represent outl iers (values that exceed the upper or lower quartile
by 3/2 times, whiskers (vertical lines) represent the maximu m and minimum scores (excluding outliers). Boxplots repres ent distributions of Exposure Sub-Index (ESI),
Infrastructure Sub-Index (ISI), and Socio-Economic Sub-Index ( SESI) scores among Small Craft Harbors within each LFA. Backg round shading represents the Lobster
Vulnerability Index (LVI) per LFA. There is no LVI for LFAs 27, 3 1A, 31B, and 32 because there are no offshore lobster ﬁsheries in these regions.
similar in each LFA, except in the case of LFA 41. V alues ranged
from 2 to 2.5, with LFAs 33, 34, and 38 scoring the lowest (2)
and LFAs 35 and 36 the highest (2.5) ( Figure 6). LFA 41 scored
2.5 under the BNAM scenario and 2 under the CM2.6 scenario.
None of the LFAs were predicted to experience a net loss of
suitable habitat, although in LFA 35, the gain only marginally out-
weighs the loss. LFAs with higher scores, were typically unli kely
to see any signiﬁcant gain in habitat suitability, and their stock
status was scored lower due to component variables (speciﬁcal ly
occupancy and potential). LFAs that scored 2, did so due to
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 12 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
a combination of reasons, some were predicted to experience
large gains so had very low exposure scores, while others had
very strong stock status scores, with high potential, occupan cy,
abundance, and/or food availability.
Integrated Climate Change Impact
Assessment
The primary objective of this paper is to attempt to integrate
future projections of lobster vulnerability by LFA with
assessments of the climate change vulnerabilities for the
respective ﬁshing communities ( Figure 2). This could provide
a tool for ﬁsheries resource managers to inform decisions to
incorporate climate change considerations and adaptation pla ns
into management decisions. The results of this assessment a re
presented in Figure 6.
The present-day economic dependency on ﬁsheries, as
indexed by the SESI, varies across the region with LFA 32
being the least dependent on ﬁsheries and 31B, 34, and 38
being the most dependent ( Figure 1). The reason that the LFA
32 SESI is low is that this area is very close to Halifax (the
largest city in Nova Scotia) and, therefore, the percentage o f
income derived from ﬁshing is relatively low. The proximity
to Halifax may mask the importance of the lobster industry in
the small coastal communities in this LFA. LFAs 31B, 34, and
38, are comprised of many communities with small populations
which are highly dependent economically on the lobster ﬁsher y
(Figure 1, Figure S2).
Two areas with relatively high total value from landings are
LFA 34 and LFA 27 ( Figure 1). Although lobster vulnerability
is not indexed for LFA 27, this region relies heavily on ﬁsher ies
with both inshore lobster and snow crab contributing heavil y
(Figure 1). LFA 34 has a very low LVI with lobster accounting
for more than three quarters of the landed value from all
ﬁsheries ( Figures 1, 6). To illustrate the contrast in more detail,
the frequency distributions of CIVI sub-index scores in LFA s
27 and 34 are compared with the overall distribution for the
region (Figure 7).
The environmental forcing resulting from climate change
(represented by the ESI) indicates that the distribution of
vulnerability scores across the harbors in LFA 34 is primarily in
the moderate range with no site assessed above 3. In LFA 27,
the range of the ESI is much broader and skewed toward the
high end of the distribution when compared to both LFA 34
and the overall distribution. The distribution of the ISI is similar
for LFA 27 and 34, and consistent with the overall distributi on
for the region. There is a strong contrast in the SESI scores f or
LFA 27 and 34 indicating that these regions have much diﬀerent
economic dependencies on the ﬁshing industry. For LFA 34, the
SESI is highly right skewed indicating that a large percentag e of
the communities in this area are predominantly dependent on
ﬁshing income and likely have low adaptive capacity. For LFA 27,
the SESI distribution is relatively ﬂat with equivalent num bers
of low, medium, and high vulnerability. The contrast in SESI
scores LFA 27 and 34 is likely explained by the economic diversity
in LFA 27, with the SCH sites in the northern part of the area
being remote rural communities with small populations and low
FIGURE 7 | Distributions of vulnerability sub-indices in Lobster Fis hing Areas
(LFA) 27 (blue) and 34 (yellow) compared to the distribution of all LFAs
combined (gray). Plots are counts of Small Craft Harbors loc ation scores for:
(A) the Exposure Sub-Index (ESI), (B) Infrastructure Sub-Index (ISI), and (C)
Socio-Economic Sub-Index (SESI).
business diversity while the southern part of LFA 27 encompasses
the Cape Breton Regional Municipality with a large population
base and diversiﬁed commercial sector. LFA 27 also has a more
diverse ﬁshery with income from the snow crab ﬁshery being
almost equivalent to that of the lobster ﬁshery. Nonetheles s, the
Scotian Shelf represents the southern range of the snow crab
ﬁshery; therefore, future warming of the ocean in LFA 27 is li kely
to change the balance between the snow crab and lobster ﬁsheries
(
Stortini et al., 2015; Zisserson and Cook, 2017 ).
The SESI scores for LFAs 27 and 34 are further compared
in Figure 8 by displaying the four indicator variables that
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 13 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
FIGURE 8 | Distribution of scores for the Socio-Economic Sub-Index (SE SI) variables and Species Value Diversity (SVD) for three gro upings of Small Craft Harbors:
LFA 27, LFA 34, and all other LFAs. (A) Percent income from ﬁshing, (B) Population, (C) Quantity Landed per Vessel, and (D) Species Value Diversity (SVD).
comprise the index. It is evident from the percent income
derived from ﬁshing that LFA 34 is highly dependent on
this industry at almost all SCH locations. In LFA 27, the
percent income from ﬁshing is split between bins 1 and 4,
demonstrating that this LFA has SCH sites that are either
highly dependent on ﬁshing, but an equivalent number that are
not very dependent. The population indicator is right skewed
for LFAs 27 and 34, this matches the overall distribution
which reﬂects the fact that most SCH sites are in small rural
communities and this does not vary much across the region.
The quantity landed per vessel at SCH locations is slightly
left skewed distribution and would seem to imply that this
indicator is not the dominant factor in the SESI. Relative to t he
overall distribution, LFA 34 is slightly right skewed indic ating
that there is a relatively high amount of economic activity
occurring in this region and the opposite is observed for LFA
27. Finally, the SVD for both LFAs 27 and 34 show high
dependence on a few species, which is consistent with the
overall distribution.
Although LFAs 27, 31A, 31B, and 32 were not assigned
LVI scores, these regions maintain active and proﬁtable
inshore lobster ﬁsheries. The considerations of their Expos ure,
Infrastructure, and Socio-Economic Sub-Index scores can h elp
describe the capacity of these regions to adapt should lobster
productivity change ( Figure 6). The ESI and ISI scores are
moderate in all of these LFAs, indicating that they are likely to
experience some degree of change in environmental condition s,
and infrastructure damage/costs. There is a wider range in SES I
scores: low in LFA 32, moderate in LFA 27, and on the higher
end in LFAs 31B and 31A. The SESI describes the vulnerability
of the community and their dependence on the ﬁsheries so a
high SESI score combined with a decrease in lobster abundanc e,
would provide reason to look into other confounding factors,
and the potential need for adaptation strategies. It is importa nt
to note that this model cannot resolve the inshore lobster
ﬁshery (which is highly active in these LFAs), and it is possib le
that the inclusion of the inshore ﬁshing data could provide
useful additional information for future development of Lob ster
Vulnerability Indices in these regions.
DISCUSSION
A climate change impact assessment by ﬁshery management
unit has been presented by integrating coastal and economic
vulnerability with projected changes in oﬀshore lobster
populations. This assessment projects an overall increase in
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 13 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 14 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
suitable habitat across the shelf, most notably in the south west
with expansion to the northeast (including LFAs 33, 34, 38,
40, and 41). However, habitat suitability is predicted to dec line
in some parts of the Bay of Fundy where the ambient bottom
temperature is already relatively warmer than elsewhere.
Rheuban et al. (2017) performed a similar analysis on the
southern New England to the Gulf of Maine range of this
stock (directly south of our study region) and projected habi tat
expansion northward and oﬀshore with a loss of habitat in
southern inshore areas where temperatures will begin to excee d
the thermal range (New England). Although our study was
unable to assess inshore areas, we assume that inshore habit at
is not vulnerable to warming in the near-term because this ha s
only been projected for the southern-most part of the range.
Using survey data collected in both inshore and oﬀshore in th e
Gulf of Maine, lobster habitat has been shown to be increasin g in
both areas (
Tanaka et al., 2019a), and is projected to continue to
increase under the RCP8.5 scenario ( Tanaka et al., 2019b). These
results, with patterns similar to our own, highlight how clim ate
change-informed habitat suitability projections can help pr epare
communities to adapt to potential changes in their ﬁsheries
(
Rheuban et al., 2017; Tanaka et al., 2019a ).
Higher vulnerability in areas with increasing suitable habitat is
largely a reﬂection of either poor coastal infrastructure or socio-
economic factors. This reﬂects the economic risks associat ed
with a community dependence on revenue from a single ﬁshery
or the ﬁshery as a whole. While the ﬁshing industry in DFO
Maritimes Region is supported by a diverse range of species,
when it comes to value, it is dominated by a few key species
(Figure 1). Coupled with high socio-economic dependence and
a moderate state of infrastructure, the region would be at gr eat
risk if it were dependent on a cold-water species. Importantly,
the entire province is heavily reliant on lobster, and adaptat ion
planners will have to address this dependency on one species.
Here, we’ve used simple economic indicators but a more in-depth
analysis would be informative.
Overall, the ISI scores are similar across LFAs and of moderate
vulnerability ( Figure S3). This suggests that at the scale of the
LFAs, Small Craft Harbors are in similar (moderate) conditi on
across the region. The range of harbor conditions is highest
in LFA 34, and partially reﬂects a higher number of SCH sites
in that LFA. The assessment of the vulnerability of the coast al
infrastructure can be enhanced by considering the ESI, whic h
represents the expected forcing of the physical environment
resulting from climate change. The general trend in the ESI is that
it increases from west to east. One of the primary drivers of th is
trend is the projection of a reduced number of weeks of winter
sea ice under a warmer climate. In the present climate, land-
fast ice in harbors provides some protection for infrastructu re
from large waves in the winter. Sea ice does not form in the
harbors in the western part of Nova Scotia and, therefore, no
change is expected in the future climate scenarios. While the
ESI is lowest in the LFAs in the western part of Nova Scotia,
this should not be interpreted as the environmental forcing
not being an issue for climate change vulnerability. Indeed ,
all of this region is expected to experience relative sea level
rise at a rate faster than the global average, in part due to
land subsidence in southern Atlantic Canada (
Greenan et al.,
2018b).
In general, our study suggests that oﬀshore lobster is not
imminently vulnerable to the projected warming of bottom
waters. However, lobster do spend the early part of their life
cycle (when mortality rates are highest) in the surface wate rs
(
DFO, 2009 ). Carloni et al. (2018) suggested that changes
in zooplankton assemblages due to ocean warming may be
transferring up the food web as they found post-larval abundance
and lobster recruitment to be correlated with C. ﬁnmarchicus
abundance and not temperature. To account for bottom up food-
web variability, we included current trends an abundance of C.
ﬁnmarchicus as a measure of early life cycle food availability in
the lobster stock status sub-index. We did not include futur e
projections for C. ﬁnmarchicus availability, or indices for other
potential prey species including at other lifecycle stages. Th is
could be a beneﬁcial next step should appropriate data become
available. There is also some indication that Atlantic Cana da
is experiencing more frequent and intense heat waves (
Oliver
et al., 2018). With climate change, these extremes are expected to
become more common. This presents a challenge to management
because while animals may be able to adapt over the longer term ,
extremes can present short term disruptions when marine heat
waves exceed the animal’s thermal tolerance (
Mills et al., 2013 ).
For example, in 2011/2012, the commercial snow crab ﬁshery on
the Scotian Shelf suﬀered as a result of a positive temperature
event that negatively impacted the snow crab juvenile stages
(predominantly), resulting in a temporary decrease in abundance
(
Zisserson and Cook, 2017).
Rising temperatures and heat waves have been linked to an
increase in susceptibility and prevalence of epizootic shell disease
that became noticeable among US lobster populations since the
mid 1990’s (
Castro et al., 2006; Glenn and Pugh, 2006 ). The
relation with temperature is complicated, but in general, ris ing
temperatures can reach levels that increase physiological str ess
and enable bacterial to grow ( Smolowitz et al., 2005; Glenn and
Pugh, 2006; Tlusty and Metzler, 2012 ). Epizootic shell disease
is most damaging at ∼15◦C ( Tlusty and Metzler, 2012 ), and
lobsters begin to physiologically stress at temperatures abo ve
20◦C (Glenn and Pugh, 2006; Fogarty et al., 2007). Spatially, shell
disease is most pervasive US waters, increasing in prevalence
toward southern extent of the range (
Smolowitz et al., 2005;
Glenn and Pugh, 2006 ), where higher temperatures are more
consistently sustained. As temperatures continue to rise alo ng
the Northeast US and southern Atlantic Canada, we can expect
the occurrence of shell disease to continue to spread north.
While it is current practice to include this consideration in
New England natural mortality rate assessments (
Correia et al.,
2006), the model projections for changes in ocean temperature
on the Scotian Shelf and Bay of Fundy do not suggest that this
will be an important issue by mid-century if temperature is a
primary driver.
Marine heat waves can also promote shifts in distribution
and disrupt the timing of seasonal events, leading to a mismatch
between the seasonal/spatial aspects of the targeting ﬁshery (
Mills
et al., 2013). This was observed among lobster populations in the
Gulf of Maine in 2012 when record high temperatures spurred
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 14 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 15 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
an increase in molting/growth rates alongside an early migra tion
into the inshore ﬁsheries ( Mills et al., 2013 ). This created a
longer ﬁshing season with proportionally high landings of new
recruits. The combination of these factors makes the populatio n
vulnerable to overﬁshing (
Mills et al., 2013). The potential eﬀects
of marine heat waves are of speciﬁc interest on the Scotian
Shelf, because this region has a relatively high proportion of
species at the edge of their thermal range and is, therefore, m ore
susceptible to marine heat waves (
Smale et al., 2019). Developing
an understanding of the potential timing, severity, and eﬀect s of
marine heat waves on populations of economic importance, is
an additional element that should be considered in adaptatio n
planning in ﬁsheries management.
It is important to recognize that temperature change is not
the only factor that will impact the spatial development of
oﬀshore lobster populations. Other factors include predator a nd
prey species, acidiﬁcation, environmental degradation, inv asive
species, and ﬁshing pressure. The abundance of both predator
and prey species as well as ﬁshing pressure will factor into lobst er
condition, mortality, and stock status (
Shackell et al., 2014; Le
Bris et al., 2018 ). A population that is shifting due to warming
temperatures can be further constrained if key lower trophic
level prey species are not available within the new range. This
can occur as these short-lived species have a stronger capacit y
to adapt to change, and thus may not require range shifts to
cope with warming temperatures (
Friedland et al., 2018 ). Le
Bris et al. (2018) observed that in southwest New England (the
southern limit of the range), shell disease has made a signiﬁ cant
contribution the collapse of the stock; however, alongside r ising
temperatures in the Gulf of Maine, ﬁshing practices that protec t
the more fecund females (and are not practiced in southwest New
England), combined with the removal of key predators through
other ﬁsheries led to a boom in population. Overall, eﬀective
ﬁshery management will require dynamic and regionally tailo red
planning with constant consideration of border issues and
interactions between compounding factors, this can be supported
with ongoing monitoring and collaboration with science.
The overall projected changes in oﬀshore lobster habitat
for the region are positive. Nonetheless, to promote the
prolonged sustainability of this stock these changes should
still be considered in resource management. As the population
shifts toward the northeast, it will become less abundant
around its southwest limit. Through the identiﬁcation of ar eas
where changes in lobster populations are projected to occur
alongside regional vulnerabilities to climate change, the tool
presented here can help inform decisions on locations where
adaptation planning strategies may need to be developed and
or implemented. This could involve preparing a region for
changes in potential catch, through adjustments in licensin g
and quotas, preparing to adapt to a decrease in productivity by
encouraging/assisting ﬁshers to diversify (i.e., where th ey ﬁsh,
targeted species, to non-ﬁsheries-related income), or suppor ting
projected increases in catch through the investment in upgrad es
and upkeep of coastal infrastructure where needed Finally, i t is
important that management anticipate and prepare to adapt to
changes as a lag in updates to regulatory constraints (such as
licensing and quotas) can lead to an unrepresentative ﬁshing
footprint which can lead to overﬁshing or economic struggles
for license holders (
Pinsky and Fogarty, 2012; Mills et al., 2013 ).
The LFA borders within the DFO Maritimes Region impose
constraints on the ﬁshing industry and present challenges as a
warming ocean increases productivity in areas such as LFA 41,
which currently has a single license holder.
Climate-induced ocean warming is leading to an accelerated
redistribution of marine species catch potential (
Cheung et al.,
2010; Pinsky and Fogarty, 2012; Poloczanska et al., 2013 ).
Regulations and resources will limit the ﬁshing industry’s a bility
to adapt to changes in stock availability. If ﬁshers are accust omed
to long distance ﬁshing trips, they can reroute to follow the
stock. Nonetheless, depending on the extent of the range shif t,
borders may become a limiting factor, and if they do not have the
resources to follow range shifts, or if there is a drop in abundance,
they will be forced to adapt their practice and target new species
which will be accompanied by more overhead costs (
Pinsky and
Fogarty, 2012 ). Knowing how animals will shift distribution,
and what to do about shifts across management borders, both
regional, and international will be critical to their plans (
Link
et al., 2011 ). Considerations of climate change are not common
in stock assessment models. Tanaka et al. (2019a) combined
American lobster recruitment dynamics with spatio-temporal
variability in habitat suitability, and demonstrated how th e
inclusion of dynamic environmental variables can improve th e
performance of a stock assessment model. Here, we present a tool
for anticipating change, that could potentially be incorporated
into stock assessment models and help ﬁshers and resources
managers with long term planning.
CONCLUSIONS
The results of this study highlight the importance of coastal
adaptation planning, and ﬂexible ﬁsheries management that
is capable of making adjustments in a dynamic environment
impacted by climate change. This assessment which integrate s
information on coastal community and lobster vulnerability
provides both a framework and information for further in-
depth analyses by climate change adaptation planners and ﬁshery
managers. In the USA, the NOAA Climate Change Science
Strategy is being used to guide development of regional actio n
plans. The fact that our study focused on one commercial
species in one DFO administrative region points to the need for
additional research in this area, as has been highlighted in the
adaptation and resilience pillar of the Pan-Canadian Framewo rk
on Clear Growth and Climate Change. The integrative approach
presented in this paper can be adapted for other species
(commercial, depleted, etc.) to help support management and
planning decisions.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this manuscript will
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation , to
any qualiﬁed researcher.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 15 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 16 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
BG, NS, KF , PG, and ACog contributed to the development of the
concept, analysis of the data, and writing of this paper. DB, ZW,
and VS provided the future ocean climate model projections and
contributed to writing those sections of the paper related to t his.
ACoo contributed to the interpretation of lobster thermal habitat
model and provided general background on the lobster biology
and ﬁshery. CB provided zooplankton data and model analysis
and contributed to writing related sections of the paper.
FUNDING
This research was funded by Fisheries and Oceans Canada
through the Aquatic Climate Change Adaptation Services
Program (ACCASP).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jamie Tam and two reviewers
for their generous and useful suggestions on an earlier text t hat
improved the paper.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fmars.
2019.00579/full#supplementary-material
Figure S1 | Comparison of BNAM and CM2.6: seasonal changes in bottom
temperature from two ocean models. The magnitude of tempera ture change
varies between models, so they have been plotted on differen t color scales,
however, overall patterns are similar. (A) Projected change in summer (July,
August, and September) bottom temperature (BNAM). (B) Projected change in
summer bottom temperature (CM2.6). (C) Projected change in winter (January,
February, and March) bottom temperature (BNAM). (D) Projected change in
summer bottom temperature (CM2.6).
Figure S2 | The Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Index (CIVI) for Smal l Craft
Harbor locations. The scoring of 1(low vulnerability) to 5 ( high vulnerability) has
been grouped into three categories and then presented in the pie charts for each
Lobster Fishing Area (LFA).
Figure S3 | Sub-indices of the Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Ind ex (CIVI) for
Small Craft Harbor locations are as follows: (1) Environmen tal Sub-Index (ESI), (2)
Infrastructure Sub-Index (ISI), and (3) Socio-Economic Sub-Ind ex (SESI). The
scoring of 1 (low vulnerability) to 5 (high vulnerability) h as been grouped into three
categories and then presented in the pie charts for each Lobs ter Fishing
Area (LFA).
REFERENCES
Aiken, D. E., and Waddy, S. L. (1986). Environmental inﬂuence o n recruitment of
the american lobster , Homarus americanus : a perspective. Can. J. Fish. Aquat.
Sci. 43, 2258–2270. doi: 10.1139/f86-277
ASMFC (2015). Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission (ASMFC) Ameri can
Lobster Benchmark Stock Assessment and Peer-review Report. Washington, DC:
Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission. 493.
Bernier, R. Y., Jamieson, R. E., and Moore, A. M. (eds.). (2018). State of the Atlantic
Ocean Synthesis Report . Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 3167, iii, 149.
Boudreau, S. A., Anderson, S. C., and Worm, B. (2015). Top-down an d bottom-up
forces interact at thermal range extremes on American lobster. J. Anim. Ecol.
84, 840–850. doi: 10.1111/1365-2656.12322
Brennan, C. E., Maps, F., Gentleman, W. C., Plourde, S., Lavoie, D., Chassé, J.,
et al. (2019). How transport shapes copepod distributions in relation to whale
feeding habitat: demonstration of a new modelling framework. Prog. Oceanogr.
171, 1–21. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2018.12.005
Brickman, D., Hebert, D., and Wang, Z. (2018). Mechanism for the re cent ocean
warming events on the Scotian shelf of eastern Canada. Cont. Shelf Res. 156,
11–22. doi: 10.1016/j.csr.2018.01.001
Brickman, D., Wang, Z., and DeTracey, B. (2015): V ariability of cu rrent streams
in Atlantic Canadian waters: a model study. Atmos. Ocean 54, 218–229.
doi: 10.1080/07055900.2015.1094026
Brickman, D., Wang, Z., and Detracey, B. (2016). High resolution fu ture climate
ocean model simulations for the Northwest Atlantic Shelf region. Can. Tech.
Rep. Hydrogr. Ocean Sci . 315, xiv, 143. Available online at: http://publications.
gc.ca/pub?id=9.823975&sl=0
Carloni, J. T., Wahle, R., Geoghegan, P., and Bjorkstedt, E. (201 8). Bridging the
spawner-recruit disconnect: trends in American lobster recruitment li nked to
the pelagic food web. Bull. Mar. Sci. 94, 719–735. doi: 10.5343/bms.2017.1150
Castro, K. M. Factor, J. R., Angell, T., and Landers, D. F. (2006) . The conceptual
approach to lobster shell disease revisited. J. Crustacean Biol. 26, 646–660.
doi: 10.1651/S-2761a.1
Cheng, L., Trenberth, K. E., Fasullo, J., Boyer, T., Abraham, J., an d Zhu, J. (2017).
Improved estimates of ocean heat content from 1960 to 2015. Sci. Adv. 3, 1–11.
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1601545
Cheung, W. W. L., Lam, V. W. Y., Sarmiento, J. L., Kearney, K., Wats on, R.,
Zeller, D., et al. (2010). Large-scale redistribution of maximum ﬁsh eries catch
potential in the global ocean under climate change.Glob. Chang. Biol.16, 24–35.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.01995.x
Cogswell, A., Greenan, B. J. W., and Greyson, P. (2018). Evaluatio n
of two common vulnerability index calculation methods. Ocean
Coast. Manag. 160, 46–51. doi: 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2018.
03.041
Colburn, L., Jepson, M., Weng, C., Seara, T., and Weiss, J. (2016) . Indicators of
climate change and social vulnerability in ﬁshing department communit ies
along the Eastern and Gulf coasts of the U.S. Mar. Policy 74, 323–333.
doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2016.04.030
Cook, A. M., Cassista Da-Ros, M., and Denton, C. (2017). Framework Assessment
of the Oﬀshore American Lobster (Homarus americanus) in Lobs ter Fishing
Area (LFA) 41 . DFO Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat (CSAS), research
document 2017/065. viii + 186.
Correia, S., Glenn, R., Howell, P., Jacobson, L., and Wilson, C. (200 6).
American Lobster Stock Assessment for Peer Review. Stock Assessment
Report No. 06-03 (Supplement), Atlantic States Marine Fisheries
Commission, 366. Available online at: https://www.asmfc.org/uploa ds/
ﬁle/americanLobsterStockAssessmentReport06.pdf
Devine, L., Scarratt, M., Plourde, S., Galbraith, P. S., Michaud, S ., and Lehoux,
C. (2017). Chemical and Biological Oceanographic Conditions in the Es tuary
and Gulf of St.Lawrence During 2015 . DFO Canadian Science Advisory
Secretariat (CSAS), research document 2017/034, 48. Available online at: http://
publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.837481&sl=0
DFO (2009). Assessment of American Lobster in Newfoundland . DFO Canadian
Science Advisory Secretariat (CSAS), research document 2009/02 6. Available
online at: https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/33698 9.pdf
DFO (2018). Seaﬁsheries: 2016 Value of Atlantic Coast Commercial Landings ,
by Region (Thousand Dollars) . Available online at: http://dfo-mpo.gc.ca/stats/
commercial/land-debarq/sea-maritimes/s2016av-eng.htm (access ed January 1,
2019).
Fogarty, M. J., Incze, L. S., Wahle, R. A., Mountain, D., Robins on, A., Hayhoe,
K., et al. (2007). Potential climate change impacts on marine resourc es
of the northeastern United States. Northeast Clim. Impacts Assess. Tech.
Ser. 1–33. Available online at: https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/ﬁles/legacy/
assets/documents/global_warming/pdf/miti/fogarty_et_al.pdf
Friedland, K. D., McManus, M. C., Morse, R. E., and Link, J. S. (2 018). Event
scale and persistent drivers of ﬁsh and macroinvertebrate distribut ions on the
Northeast US Shelf. ICES J. Mar. Sci. fsy167. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsy167
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 16 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 17 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
Fulton, R. J. (1995). Surﬁcial Materials of Canada / Matériaux superﬁciels
du Canada . Geological Survey of Canada, Map 1880A, 1 sheet.
doi: 10.4095/205040
Glenn, R. P., and Pugh, T. L. (2006). Epizootic shell disease in A merican
lobster (Homarus americanus) in Massachusetts coastal waters: interactions of
temperature, maturity, and intermolt duratio. J. Crustacean Biol. 26, 639–645.
doi: 10.1651/S-2754.1
Greenan, B. J. W., Cogswell, A., Greyson, P., Jean, D., Cloutier, M ., Bird, E., et al.
(2018a). Small Craft Harbours Coastal Infrastructure Vulnerability Index Pilot
Project. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 3 245, xiv
+ 73.
Greenan, B. J. W., James, T. S., Loder, J. W., Pepin, P., Azetsu-S cott, K., Ianson, D.,
et al. (2018b). “Chapter 7: Changes in oceans surrounding Canada, ” inCanada’s
Changing Climate Report, eds Bush and Lemmen (Ottawa, ON: Government of
Canada), 343–423.
Griﬃes, S. M., Biastoch, A., Böning, C., Bryan, F., Danabasoglu , G., Chassignet,
E. P., et al. (2009). Coordinated Ocean-ice Reference Experiments (COREs).
Ocean Model. 26, 1–46. doi: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2008.08.007
Hare, J. A., Morrison, W. E., Nelson, M. W., Stachura, M. M., Teeter s, E. J., Griﬃs,
R. B., et al. (2016). A vulnerability assessment of ﬁsh and inverteb rates to
climate change on the northeast U.S. continental shelf. PLoS ONE 11: e0146756.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146756
IPCC (2014). “Summary for policymakers, ” in Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Inte rgovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, eds C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach,
M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, et al. (Cambridge; New York, NY: Cambrid ge
University Press), 1–32.
Jewett, L., and Romanou, A. (2017). “Ocean acidiﬁcation and other ocean changes, ”
in Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate As sessment, Vol. I ,
eds D. J. Wuebbles, D. W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. S tewart,
and T. K. Maycock (Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program),
364–392. doi: 10.7930/J0QV3JQB
Johnson, C. L., Devred, E., Casault, B., Head, E., and Spry, J. (201 8). Optical,
Chemical, and Biological Oceanographic Conditions on the S cotian Shelf and in
the Eastern Gulf of Maine in 2016 . DFO Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat
(CSAS), research document 2018/017, v + 58. Available at: https://waves-
vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/362284.pdf
Kleisner, K. M., Fogarty, M. J., McGee, S., Barnett, A., Fratanto ni, P., Greene, J.,
et al. (2016). The eﬀects of sub-regional climate velocity on the d istribution
and spatial extent of marine species assemblages. PLoS ONE 11:e0149220.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149220
Kleisner, K. M., Fogarty, M. J., McGee, S., Hare, J. A., Moret, S., Perretti, C.
T., et al. (2017). Marine species distribution shifts on the U.S. N ortheast
Continental Shelf under continued ocean warming. Prog. Oceanogr. 153, 24–36.
doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2017.04.001
Lawton, P., and Lavalli, K. L. (1995). “Postlarval, juvenile, ado lescent, and adult
ecology, ” inBiology of the Lobster, Homarus americanus , ed J. R. Factor (New
York, NY: Academic Press), 47–88. doi: 10.1016/B978-012247570-2/50026-8
Le Bris, A., Mills, K. E., Wahle, R. A., Chen, Y., Alexander, M. A., A llyn, A.
J., et al. (2018). Climate vulnerability and resilience in the most valu able
North American ﬁshery. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, 1831–1836.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1711122115
Link, J. S., Nye, J. A., and Hare, J. A. (2011). Guidelines for in corporating ﬁsh
distribution shifts into a ﬁsheries management context. Fish Fish. 12, 461–469.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.2010.00398.x
Lowen, J. B., and DiBacco, C. (2017). Distributional changes in a guild
of non-indigenous tunicates in the NW Atlantic under high-res olution
climate projections. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser . 570, 173–186. doi: 10.3354/meps
12077
Meinshausen, M., Smith, S. J., Calvin, K., Daniel, J. S., and Kai numa, M. L.
T. (2011). The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and their ext ensions
from 1765 to 2300. Clim. Change 109, 213–241. doi: 10.1007/s10584-011-
0156-z
Meyer-Gutbrod, E., Greene, C., and Davies, K. (2018). Marine spe cies range shifts
necessitate advanced policy planning: the case of the North Atlantic right whale.
Oceanography 31, 19–23. doi: 10.5670/oceanog.2018.209
Mills, K. E., Pershing, A. J., Brown, C., Chen, Y., Chiang, F.-S. , Holland, D. S.,
et al. (2013). Fisheries management in a changing climate: lessons f rom the
2012 ocean heat wave in the Northwest Atlantic. Oceanography 26, 191–195.
doi: 10.5670/oceanog.2013.27
Oliver, E. C. J., Donat, M. G., Burrows, M. T., Moore, P. J., Smale, D. A., Alexander,
L. V., et al. (2018). Longer and more frequent marine heatwaves over the past
century. Nat. Commun. 9:1324. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03732-9
Perretti, C. T., Fogarty, M. J., Friedland, K. D., Hare, J. A., Lucey , S. M.,
McBride, R. S., et al. (2017). Regime shifts in ﬁsh recruitment on th e Northeast
US Continental Shelf. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 574, 1–11. doi: 10.3354/meps
12183
Pielou, E. C. (1996). The measurement of diversity in diﬀerent type s of biological
collections. J. Theor. Biol. 13, 131–144. doi: 10.1016/0022-5193(66)90013-0
Pinsky, M. L., and Fogarty, M. (2012). Lagged social-ecologica l responses
to climate and range shifts in ﬁsheries. Clim. Change 15, 883–891.
doi: 10.1007/s10584-012-0599-x
Poloczanska, E. S., Brown, C. J., Sydeman, W. J., Kiessling, W., S choeman, D. S.,
Moore, P. J. (2013). Global imprint of climate change on marine life. Nat. Clim.
Change 3, 919–925. doi: 10.1038/nclimate1958
R Core Team. (2018). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing .
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Available onlin e at: https://
www.R-project.org/
Rascle, N., and Ardhuin, F. (2013). A global wave parameter databas e
for geophysical applications. Part 2 : model validation with
improved source term parameterization. Ocean Model. 70, 174–188.
doi: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2012.12.001
Rascle, N., Ardhuin, F., Queﬀeulou, P., and Croizé-ﬁllon, D. (2008 ). A
global wave parameter database for geophysical applications. Part 1 :
wave-current – turbulence interaction parameters for the open ocean
based on traditional parameterizations. Ocean Model. 25, 154–171.
doi: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2008.07.006
Record, N. R., Balch, W. M., and Stamieszkin, K. (2019a). Century -scale
changes in phytoplankton phenology in the Gulf of Maine. PeerJ. 7:e6735.
doi: 10.7717/peerj.6735
Record, N. R., Runge, J. A., Pendleton, D. E., Balch, W. M., Davie s, K. T. A.,
Pershing, A. J., et al. (2019b). Rapid climate-driven circulationchanges threaten
conservation of endangered North Atlantic right whales. Oceanography 32,
162–169. doi: 10.5670/oceanog.2019.201
Reed, D., Plourde, S., Cook, A., Pepin, P., Casault, B., Lehoux, C ., et al. (2018).
Response of Scotian Shelf silver hake ( Merluccius bilinearis) to environmental
variability. Fish. Oceanogr. 28, 256–272. doi: 10.1111/fog.12406
Rheuban, J. E., Kavanaugh, M. T., and Doney, S. C. (2017). Implic ations of
future northwest Atlantic bottom temperatures on the American lobster
(Homarus americanus ) ﬁshery. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 122, 9387–9398.
doi: 10.1002/2017JC012949
Saba, V. S., Griﬃes, S. M., Anderson, W. G., Winton, M., Alexand er, M.
A., Delworth, T. L., et al. (2016). Enhanced warming of the Northwes t
Atlantic Ocean under climate change. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 121, 118–132.
doi: 10.1002/2015JC011346
Saha, S., Moorthi, S., Pan, H., Wu, X., Wang, J., Nadiga, S., et al. (2010). The NCEP
climate forecast system reanalysis. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 91, 1015–1057.
doi: 10.1175/2010BAMS3001.1
Shackell, N. L., Ferguson, K. J., den Heyer, C. E., Brickman, D., Wa ng, Z.,
and Ransier, K. T. (2019). Growing degree-day inﬂuences growth rate and
length of maturity of Northwest Atlantic halibut ( Hippoglossus hippoglussus
L.) across the southern stock domain. J. Northw. Atlan. Fish. Sci. 50, 25–35.
doi: 10.2960/J.v50.m716
Shackell, N. L., Ricard, D., and Stortini, C. (2014). Thermal habit at index of
many Northwest Atlantic temperate species stays neutral under warming
projected for 2030 but changes radically by 2060. PLoS ONE 9:e90662.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090662
Smale, D. A., Wernberg, T., Oliver, E. C. J., Thomsen, M., Harvey, B . P.,
Straub, S. C., et al. (2019). Marine heatwaves threaten global bio diversity
and the provision of ecosystem services. Nat. Clim. Chang 9, 306–312.
doi: 10.1038/s41558-019-0412-1
Smolowitz, R., Chistoserdov, A. Y., and Hsu, A. (2005). A descript ion of the
pathology of epizootic shsell disease in the American lobster, Homarus
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 17 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579
===== PAGE 18 =====
Greenan et al. Vulnerability of Lobster Fishing Communities
americanus, H. Milne Edwards 1837. J. Shellﬁsh Res. 24, 749–756. doi: 10.2983/
0730-8000(2005)24[749:ADOTPO]2.0.CO;2
Sorte, C. J., Williams, S. L., and Zerebecki, R. A. (2010). Ocean wa rming increases
threat of invasive species in a marine fouling community. Ecol. Soc. Am. 91,
2198–2204. doi: 10.1890/10-0238.1
Stanley, R., DiBacco, R. E., Lowen, C., Beiko, B., Jeﬀery, R. G. , Wyngaarden,
N., et al. (2018). A climate-associated multispecies cryptic cline in
the northwest Atlantic. Sci. Adv. 4:eaaq0929. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.
aaq0929
Staudinger, M. D., Mills, K. E., Stamieszkin, K., Record, N. R., Hu dak, C. A., Allyn,
A., et al. (2019). It’s about time: a synthesis of changing pheno logy in the Gulf
of Maine ecosystem. Fish. Oceanogr. 2019, 1–34. doi: 10.1111/fog.12429
Stortini, C. H., Chabot, D., and Shackell, N. L. (2017). Marine spec ies in ambient
low-oxygen regions subject to double jeopardy impacts of climate change. Glob.
Change Biol. 23, 2284–2296. doi: 10.1111/gcb.13534
Stortini, C. H., Shackell, N. L., Tyedmers, P., and Beazley, K. (201 5).
Assessing marine species vulnerability to projected warming on the Sco tian
Shelf, Canada. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 72, 1731–1743. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/
fsv022
Tanaka, K. R., Cao, J., Shank, B. V., Truesdell, S. B., Mazur, M. D ., Xu, L., et al.
(2019a). A model-based approach to incorporate environmental variabili ty
into assessment of a commercial ﬁshery : a case study with the Americ an
lobster ﬁshery in the Gulf of Maine and Georges Bank. ICES J. Mar. Sci.
doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsz024
Tanaka, K. R., Chang, J., Xue, Y., Li, Z., Jacobson, L., and Che n, Y. (2019b).
Mesoscale climatic impacts on the distribution of Homarus americanus
in the US inshore Gulf of Maine. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 76, 608–625.
doi: 10.1139/cjfas-2018-0075
Tlusty, M. F., and Metzler, A. (2012). Relationship between tempe rature and
shell disease in laboratory populations of juvenile American lobsters ( Homarus
americanus). J. Shellﬁsh Res. 31, 533–541. doi: 10.2983/035.031.0213
Wang, Z., Brickman, D., Greenan, B. J., and Y ashayaev I. (2016).An abrupt shift in
the labrador current system in relation to winter NAO events. J. Geophys. Res.
Oceans 121, 5338–5349. doi: 10.1002/2016JC011721
Wernberg, T., Russell, B. D., Moore, P. J., Ling, S. D., Smale, D. A., Campbell,
A., et al. (2011). Impacts of climate change in a global hotspot for te mperate
marine biodiversity and ocean warming. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 400, 7–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2011.02.021
Wheeler, J. O., Hoﬀman, P. F., Card, K. D., Davidson, A., Sanford, B . V.,
Okulitch, A. V., et al. (1996). Geological Map of Canada / Carte Géologique
du Canada. Geological Survey of Canada, Map 1860A, 1 sheet. ID: 208175.
doi: 10.4095/208175
Wood, S. N. (2004). Stable and eﬃcient multiple smoothing parameter
estimation for generalized additive models. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 99, 673–686.
doi: 10.1198/016214504000000980
Wood, S. N. (2017). Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R (2nd
edition). New York, NY: Chapman and Hall/CRC. 496.
Zisserson, B., and Cook, A. (2017). Impact of bottom water tempera ture change
on the southernmost snow crab ﬁ shery in the Atlantic Ocean. Fish. Res. 195,
12–18. doi: 10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2017.06.009
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Greenan, Shackell, Ferguson, Greyson, Cogswell, Brickman, Wang,
Cook, Brennan and Saba. This is an open-access article distr ibuted under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use , distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the orig inal author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original public ation in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these t erms.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 18 September 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 579