
===== PAGE 6 =====
0
1
Causal Feature
Causal Feature
0
1
Confounder
Class A (no confounder)
Class A (confounder)
Class B (no confounder)
Class B (confounder)
Decision Boundary
0
1
Square Intensity
0
1
Background Intensity
0
1
0
1
0
1
#Granulosa Cell Layers
0
1
Size
0
1
Healthy or Cancerous Tissue
0
1
Color Cast
0
1
Blond or Not Blond
0
1
Gender
0
1
Smiling or Not Smiling
0
1
Watermark Opacity
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
DFR: Small, balanced ﬁne-tuning set 
Group DRO: Upweighng
worst group loss
CFKD: Removing imbalance with
counterfactual explanaons
P-ClArC: Removing confounder
through projecon
RR-ClArC: Penalizing sensivity towards
confounder in loss funcon  
Before Correcon: High empircal
accuracy, low worst and
average group accuracy
Aer Correcon: Beer generalizaon,
possibly lower empircal accuracy
A: Group imbalance
→ Clever Hans behavior  
poor minority group
generalizaon
confounder direcon
for measuring
model sensivity
B: Conceptual visualizaons of the correcon methods
Projecon
Hyperplane
D: Idenfying diﬀerent decision
strategies, acquiring group labels 
E: Applying correcon methods, evaluang correcon quality
C: Biased datasets used for the comparave analysis
Causal Feature
Confounder
Confounder
Squares
CelebA Smiling
CelebA Blond
Camelyon17
Follicles
Figure 1: Research scope overview. A: Sketch illustrating how a confounder that is spuriously correlated
with the class labels due to group imbalance can lead to Clever Hans behavior. Majority groups (green
area) generalize well, while unseen minority group data (red area) is systematically misclassified. The few
training samples in the minority group can easily be overfitted and hence do not prevent the classifier
from learning a Clever Hans strategy. B: Conceptual visualization of the selected correction methods. C:
Overview of the datasets used in our experiments, highlighting the distinction between the causal (x-axis)
and the confounding (y-axis) feature. D: Identification of valid and Clever Hans decision strategies with
the help of LRP and SpRAy; corresponding annotation of whole data point clusters with group labels. E:
Application of the correction methods, followed by an evaluation and comparison of the correction quality.
This specific example shows the decision boundary and confidence regions of the classifier trained on biased
Squares before and after applying RR-ClArC. The ideal decision boundary would be a vertical line in the
center, perfectly separating the samples by the value of the causal feature.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
2
Method Review
Building on the method selection outlined in Section 1.2, this section provides a comprehensive overview of
the approaches examined in this study. We first describe techniques for detecting spurious correlations that
ML models may exploit, and then present correction strategies designed to prevent or mitigate the resulting
Clever Hans behavior.
Since all correction methods except for CFKD used in our comparative analysis require group labels, we
will provide a brief explanations how the terms confounder label and group label are used throughout this
study: In addition to a class label ti ∈C (with C denoting the set of class indices), each sample i is
also characterized by a confounder label qi ∈{0, 1}. For confounders such as watermarks or other dataset
artifacts, the confounder label indicates whether the respective artifact is present (q = 1) or absent (q = 0).
For concepts like background color or object size, where there is no natural way of assigning the confounder
labels, we arbitrarily assign to all samples with a specific color or size the label q = 1, and to all other samples
q = 0. Although confounding features may be continuous, they are discretized for the experiments in this
study so that the resulting confounder label is a binary variable. We will also only regard a single confounder
at a time, even though it is possible for multiple confounders to be active simultaneously. The group label of
a sample i is defined as the tuple containing both its class and confounder label (ti, qi). Accordingly, samples
with an equal group label form a data group. Note that the original ClArC paper (Anders et al., 2022) uses
the term artifact label, but we prefer the more general term confounder label, since the confounding features
in our experiments are not necessarily artifacts.
2.1
Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) (Bach et al., 2015) is an attribution-based method that assigns
each input feature, e.g. each pixel of an image, an attribution score (relevance) indicating its contribution
to a model’s output. The result can be visualized as a heatmap, highlighting the regions of the input that
the model relied on most strongly. Such visualizations offer insights into the model’s decision process and
can reveal spurious correlations indicative of Clever Hans behavior, as can be seen in Figure 2.
Not
Smiling
Smiling
Figure 2: Selected samples from the CelebA dataset paired with their respective heatmaps as an overlay
over the original image. The classifier was trained to distinguish between images of smiling and non-smiling
persons. A watermark was added in the bottom right of each image, but the transparency of the watermark
is correlated with the class labels. For images with the label Smiling, the watermark is bolder in most cases,
and for images with the label Not Smiling, it is usually more transparent. Thus, the model learns to exploit
the watermark as a Clever Hans feature, which can clearly be seen in the heatmap overlays: For the image
on the very right in the Not Smiling row, we can see that the model correctly considered the mouth of
the person to contribute to the Not Smiling class. However, the bold watermark actually had a negative
contribution, possibly leading to a false classification. Conversely, for the Smiling class, a bold watermark
acts as a strong positive indicator, sometimes leading the model to ignore the shape of the mouth completely,
as e.g. in the first and second images in the bottom row.
Formally, LRP redistributes relevance from each subsequent layer of the neural network to its predecessor,
starting at the model output f(x) and ending at the individual pixels of input x. The relevance of the output
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
layer L is defined as RL = f(x). Then, for a single neuron j in the previous layer L −1, its relevance can be
computed as
RL−1
j
=
zj
P
j′ zj′ RL
(1)
with zj being the neurons pre-activation (i.e. its activation is aj = σ(zj) with activation function σ). As
we can see, we normalize the relevance by dividing by the sum of the pre-activations of all neurons in L −1
that our output neuron is connected to. Analogous, the relevance a neuron i in layer L −2 receives from a
neuron j in layer L −1 is:
RL−2
ij
=
zij
P
i′ zi′j
RL−1
j
(2)
To compute the total relevance of neuron i, we have to sum up the relevances that are distributed from all
the neurons in layer L −1 to neuron i:
RL−2
i
=
X
j
RL−2
ij
(3)
This process is continued until we arrive at the input layer, where the relevances of the individual input
neurons (i.e. pixels) can be visualized as a heatmap. An important property of LRP is that relevance is
conserved between layers, so that:
f(x) =
X
i
RL−1
i
=
X
i
RL−2
i
= . . . =
X
i
R1
i =
X
i
R(xi)
(4)
This means the network decision is directly rewritten as a sum of easy-to-interpret attributions from each
pixel (instead of writing R1
i for the relevance of pixel i, we can also write R(xi)).
Conditional Relevance Propagation (CRP) also makes use of the same backpropagation, but additionally
allows to condition the relevance not only on a specific class (e.g. Smiling), but also on human-interpretable
concepts (such as Mouth or Watermark) by supplying a set of conditions θ = {c1, c2, . . . , cn} to the process
(R(x|θ)). These conditions can be thought of as rules that direct the flow of the backpropagation only
through specific parts of the neural network. In practice, this is done by selecting one or more channels in a
layer that we are interested in. All relevance is then only distributed through these channels. Especially in
deeper layers, channels are assumed to encode for high-level, human-understandable concepts (see e.g. (Bau
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2015)), so this procedure allows for the generation of heatmaps regarding these
individual concepts. By repeating the process with alternating condition sets, we can systematically search
for concepts important to the model’s decision making. It is also possible to select only a certain output
neuron in the case of multiclass classification, thereby receiving attribution values supporting or opposing a
model’s decision with respect to a particular class.
2.2
Spectral Relevance Analysis (SpRAy)
While LRP explanations can be helpful to discover undesirable decision strategies, examining heatmaps for
individual predictions does not allow us to conclude that a model consistently avoids Clever Hans behavior.
Explanations for some samples may appear valid even when the model relies on spurious correlations, because
not all inputs contain the confounding feature. Without prior knowledge of the confounder’s presence or
distribution, a large number of LRP explanations would need to be examined manually until we can deduce
with sufficient certainty that a model did not learn any invalid decision strategies.
SpRAy (Lapuschkin et al., 2019) addresses this limitation by combining local and global approaches. Instead
of analyzing explanations sample by sample, SpRAy is able to process large amounts of attribution maps
and arrange them into clusters by similarity. With sufficient domain knowledge, this allows us to identify
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
all distinct decision-making strategies learned by the model, including Clever Hans strategies. This pro-
cedure reveals at scale for which samples the model uses valid features and for which it relies on spurious
confounders, enabling the assignment of confounder labels for all samples in a dataset. These labels are
essential for correction techniques such as DFR, Group DRO, or ClArC methods. When ground-truth labels
are unavailable, SpRAy allows us to avoid the extensive human labor that comes with manual annotation.
The first step of SpRAy is to generate relevance heatmaps h1, . . . , hn ∈Rd using LRP or CRP for all samples
of interest. As these heatmaps indicate which input features are important for the model’s classification
decision, clusters of similar heatmaps intuitively represent the different decision strategies learned by the
model. In order to identify these clusters, SpRAy uses Spectral Clustering, which is described in detail in
(von Luxburg, 2007). In short, Spectral Clustering is performed by creating a similarity graph, where each
heatmap is modeled as a vertex, and the similarity between two heatmaps is used as the weight of the edge
connecting them. This graph can be represented by a weighted adjacency matrix S, with each entry sij
containing the pairwise similarity between heatmaps i and j. There are different methods to construct the
similarity graph. One possibility is to apply the (sparse) k-Nearest Neighbors algorithm to the heatmaps.
If a heatmap is not among the k nearest neighbors of another heatmap, the respective entry is set to 0.
Otherwise, we set it to their similarity score, which can e.g. be calculated with the gaussian kernel:
sij = exp(−∥hi −hj∥2
2σ2
)
(5)
The hyperparameter σ can be used to modify the widths of the neighborhood. From the weighted adjacency
matrix S, we compute the (normalized) graph Laplacian L := I −D−1S, with D denoting the degree matrix
of the graph. The next step is to compute the first k eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk ∈Rn (i.e.
the eigenvectors
corresponding to the first k eigenvalues ordered by size, starting from the smallest).
The eigenvectors
form the columns of a matrix U ∈Rn×k, whose rows y1, . . . , yn can be used as low-dimensional (k << d)
representations for our heatmaps. Accordingly, U constitutes the Spectral Embedding of the heatmaps.
Now, we can apply conventional clustering algorithms like k-Means or DBSCAN to the representations,
and optionally use further embedding methods such as t-SNE to visualize and explore the distribution of
the heatmaps to hopefully identify the decision strategies learned by our model. Figure 3 shows a t-SNE
visualization of the Spectral Embedding using real data from a colored version of the MNIST dataset.
Figure 3: Result of a Spectral Relevance Analysis on Class ’0’ samples of the Colored MNIST dataset,
where 50% of samples from Class ’0’ are colored red, while all other samples are colored white. The spectral
embedding is visualized with the help of t-SNE. It is clearly visible that the samples are arranged in two
distinct clusters, representing the two decision strategies learned by the model: classification by coloring
(left side), which constitutes a Clever Hans effect, and classification by the shape of the depicted digit (right
side), which is the correct, causal concept that we actually want our model to base its decision on.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Lapuschkin et al. (Lapuschkin et al., 2019) don’t explicitly specify a reason why they apply Spectral Cluster-
ing to the relevance maps instead of applying other clustering techniques. One reason might be that Spectral
Clustering is a well-established method that also works well in cases where the clusters don’t have convex
shapes, as opposed to e.g. directly using k-Means, and can also be used with large, complex datasets (von
Luxburg, 2007).
In practice, it can be beneficial to downsize the relevance maps before applying SpRAy, because it can
speed up the process and make it more robust (Lapuschkin et al., 2019). In addition, it is not necessary to
use the relevance maps of the input layer. As high-level concepts usually are better captured and become
more disentangled in the deeper layers of the model (i.e. captured by distinct channels (Bau et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2015; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Anders et al., 2022)), using the attribution maps of these layers
can produce better results. This is also another advantage over using LRP without SpRAy, because only
attribution scores in input space (or for the first few shallow layers) can be visualized as heatmaps in a way
that is meaningful to and interpretable by humans. This makes it hard to assess the importance of concepts
that overlap in input space, especially (but not exclusively) if we have multiple non-local concepts such
as background texture and color cast. By choosing an appropriate layer for computing attribution scores,
SpRAy can still successfully cluster samples by the importance of the overlapping concepts, allowing us to
identify distinct strategies learned by the model that would be hard or impossible to detect when manually
examining heatmaps.
2.3
Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs)
Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) were first introduced by Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2018) as a global XAI-
tool that measures a model’s response to a specific concept, i.e. it quantifies how important a concept c
is for reaching a particular classification. Given our trained model as a composite of its individual layers
f = fL ◦. . . ◦f1, we can also view the model as the composite of 1) a feature extractor f(l)
fe = fl ◦. . . ◦f1
that extracts informative, high-level features from the raw input features, i.e. it computes meaningful latent
representations for the input samples, and 2) a downstream head f(l)
dh = fL ◦. . . ◦fl+1 which performs the
actual classification task based on these latent representations, so that f = f(l)
dh ◦f (l)
fe . Then, the CAV of a
concept is defined as the vector orthogonal to a linear decision boundary (i.e. a hyperplane) separating the
representations al = f (l)
fe (x) (layer l activations) of inputs containing the concept and the representations
of inputs that do not. Layer l at which the model is "split" will usually be one of the deeper layers of the
model, e.g. the penultima layer, because as already mentioned in section 2.2, deeper layers often extract
and disentangle the high-level concepts we are interested in. However, the exact choice highly depends on
the nature of the concept and the model architecture, and some concepts may be better represented in the
activations of shallower layers (see e.g. (Kim et al., 2018; Anders et al., 2022)).
In our case, the concept we are interested in is the respective confounder.
Given that each sample is
annotated with a confounder label indicating the presence of a Clever Hans feature, computing a CAV for
that Clever Hans feature is simple: We train a linear classifier, e.g. a linear SVM, to differentiate between the
representations al of Clever Hans samples and clean samples by using their respective confounder labels as the
classification targets. The classifier weights then constitute a CAV for the Clever Hans feature: vc,l
svm = wsvm.
Since we want the CAV to only be aligned with the confounding concept’s direction and, accordingly, be
orthogonal to the directions of all other causal concepts, it is usually necessary that all samples used to
train the linear classifier are from the same class. If both the Clever Hans samples and the clean samples
are sufficiently representative for the general data distribution in the chosen target class, it can be assumed
that the causal concepts do not influence the decision boundary of the linear classifier and are therefore not
captured by the CAV. Now, we can compute the conceptual sensitivity Sc,l with
Sc,l = ∇al[f (l)
dh (al)] · vc,l
(6)
to get a measurement of how sensitive the model is towards the concept of interest.
However, according to Pahde et al. (Pahde et al., 2025), using the weight vector of a linear classifier as a
CAV might make it susceptible to noise, potentially leading to poor alignment with the direction of the
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
concept in latent space. Instead, they propose a different kind of CAV called Pattern Concept Activation
Vector (PCAV). An estimation of the PCAV for concept c at layer l is given by
vc,l
pat = cov[al, q]
σ2q
,
(7)
i.e. the (empirical) covariance between latent representations al and their confounder labels q divided by
the (empirical) variance of q. Pahde et al. experimentally show that PCAVs better capture the confounder’s
direction in latent space in the presence of noise compared to CAVs acquired by training a linear classifier
(Pahde et al., 2025). Again, we only want to consider activations of samples from the same target class. Oth-
erwise, since the confounder labels are also correlated with the actual causal concepts, the PCAV would not
be aligned with the confounding concept’s direction in latent space, but with the direction of a superposition
of confounding and causal concepts.
Alternatively to directly using the activations al as latent representations of x when computing a (P)CAV,
Dreyer et al. also try to first either perform max-pooling or take the mean over the spatial dimensions, i.e.
the width w and the height h, of the activations (Dreyer et al., 2024). Given that layer l has k channels,
al is in Rm×w×h. After max-pooling or taking the mean, the new dimensionality would simply be Rm, so
we end up with a single score per channel. There is no explicit reason stated for this in (Dreyer et al.,
2024), but presumably it was done as a way to reduce noise in the representations. Also, when assuming
that each channel carries information about one specific concept, the new representation can be seen as
a set of indicator values for each individual concept. In addition, reducing the dimensionality can reduce
memory requirements and computation times. Whether max-pooling or averaging should be performed will
be determined in our experiments by a hyperparameter that will be referred to as the CAV mode.
2.4
Class Artifact Compensation (ClArC)
Class Artifact Compensation (ClArC) refers to a family of correction methods developed to mitigate Clever
Hans behavior in ML models. First, Anders et al. introduced Augmentative ClArC (A-ClArC) and Projective
ClArC (P-ClArC) (Anders et al., 2022), which were later further refined by Pahde et al. (Pahde et al.,
2025). Subsequently, Dreyer et al. introduced Right Reason ClArC (RR-ClArC) (Dreyer et al., 2024), which
generally achieves superior performance compared with A-ClArC and P-ClArC. The most recent variant,
Reactive ClArC (R-ClArC) (Bareeva et al., 2024), further advances this approach but appeared too recently
to be included in this study. All ClArC variants are applied post-hoc to an already trained predictor rather
than modifying the training process itself.
ClArC requires access to confounder labels q ∈{0, 1} for a representative subset of samples. When ground-
truth labels are unavailable, they can be inferred automatically using SpRAy. Based on these labels, we
choose a target class y and partition the data into two disjoint subsets, X−= {xi | qi = 0 ∧ti = y} and
X+ = {xi | qi = 1 ∧ti = y}. A CAV vc is then computed to capture the direction associated with the
confounding concept c in latent space.
As discussed in section 2.3, PCAVs are generally preferred over
weight vectors obtained from a linear classifier because they are more reliable under noisy conditions. From
this step onward, the procedure diverges between the different ClArC variants.
P-ClArC.
For P-ClArC, we construct a suppressive artifact model that removes the confounding compo-
nent from each sample representation. The model is defined as
hsup(x) = (I −vcvT
c )x + vcvT
c zsup
(8)
where zsup represents the non-artifact reference point computed as the mean of all non-confounder samples,
zsup =
1
|X−|
X
x−∈X−
x−
(9)
As already established, it can often improve the quality of the CAV when it is derived from activations
acting as latent representations al = f (l)
fe (x) instead of the raw inputs x. In that case, the suppressive model
operates on the feature space of layer l: hsup(al).
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Figure 4b shows a sketch of the original setting for P-ClArC as described in (Anders et al., 2022): The
task is a typical classification problem, but one class contains a spurious artifact, such as a watermark or
rounded image corners, that never appears in the other class(es).
To correct the resulting Clever Hans
behavior, the suppressive model hsup uses the CAV to project all data points onto a hyperplane orthogonal
to the direction related to the confounding feature.
This projection removes the confounder from each
representation, preventing the classifier from exploiting it as a shortcut. The hyperplane is anchored at
reference point zsup.
The suppressive model, and thereby the projection, is integrated as an additional layer within the model
architecture. When defined on the inputs x directly, we place it before the first model layer: fcorrected =
f ◦hsup. When instead defined on the activations of layer l, the suppressive model has to be inserted between
layer l and layer l + 1: fcorrected = f (l)
dh ◦hsup ◦f (l)
fe . After the projection, all representations approximate
non-confounder samples, effectively neutralizing the bias in the model’s decision function. The intention
behind defining reference point zsup as the mean of all non-confounder samples is that they should ideally
remain (nearly) unchanged by the projection.
0
1
Causal Feature
0
1
Confounder
CAV
Class A (no confounder)
Class A (confounder)
Class B (no confounder)
Ideal Decision Boundary
Clever Hans Decision Boundary
Projection Hyperplane
Reference Point z
(a) A-ClArC sketch
0
1
Causal Feature
0
1
Confounder
CAV
(b) P-ClArC sketch
Figure 4: Sketch illustrating how A-ClArC and P-ClArC use a CAV to (a) add the confounder to or (b)
remove the confounder from all samples. During training, there are no examples from class B containing
the confounder available, so the model strongly associates the confounder with class A, resulting in a Clever
Hans decision boundary. During inference, if there are new data points from class B that do contain the
confounder, they will get misclassified.
To fix this Clever Hans behavior, both A-ClArC and P-ClArC
project all data points onto a hyperplane that is orthogonal to the direction associated with the confounder
(captured by the CAV), so that it can no longer be used by the model as a discriminative feature between
the two classes. However, in this setting, P-ClArC comes with the advantage that no additional fine-tuning
is necessary, because for data points on the hyperplane, the true decision boundary and the confounded
decision boundary already result in the same classification. A-ClArC requires fine-tuning, because otherwise,
all projected data points from class B would get misclassified, since the true decision boundary and the Clever
Hans decision boundary deviate for class B samples containing the confounder.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
In this particular setting, additional fine-tuning is not required, because the ideal and the Clever Hans
decision boundaries produce identical predictions for non-confounder samples (cf. Figure 4b).
Whether
fine-tuning is necessary depends on the specific shape of the learned decision boundary, and hence on the
distribution of the confounder in the dataset. When fine-tuning, only the layers following the projection
should be updated (i.e. only fine-tune f(l)
dh ). The earlier layers must remain frozen. Otherwise, the network
may learn a new representation in which the direction of the confounder is no longer aligned with the
computed Concept Activation Vector, thereby undoing the suppression effect.
A notable limitation of this approach is that it projects all samples, regardless of whether they contain the
confounding feature. Preserving performance on clean samples therefore requires that causal and confounding
features are approximately orthogonal in latent space. This assumption may not hold in practice, especially
when the dataset is small or the feature representations are highly entangled. To prevent this, choosing the
correct projection layer l is crucial, but finding the optimal value might require extensive hyperparameter
tuning. Moreover, a concept that acts as a confounder for one class can be part of a valid decision strategy for
another class. Because P-ClArC applies a single projection across all classes, it cannot make this distinction,
which may degrade overall classification accuracy.
A-ClArC.
A-ClArC is conceptually very similar to P-ClArC. The main difference lies in the direction of
projection: instead of removing the confounding feature, A-ClArC projects it onto all samples. The method
defines an inductive artifact model:
hind(x) = (I −vcvT
c )x + vcvT
c zind
(10)
with the artifact reference point zind as the mean of the confounder samples
zind =
1
|X+|
X
x+∈X+
x+
(11)
Mathematically, A-ClArC differs from P-ClArC only in this choice of reference point z. The general idea
remains the same: after projection, the classifier can no longer discriminate between confounder and non-
confounder samples because the confounding component has been equalized across all representations. Con-
sequently, the confounder can no longer be used as a shortcut feature. However, since the model originally
associates the presence of the confounder with a specific class, all projected samples tend to be classified as
that class (see Figure 4a). Fine-tuning the model layers following the projection layer is therefore necessary,
so the network learns to rely on causal features, while the confounding signal (ideally) remains constant
across all inputs.
Because A-ClArC is conceptually almost identical to P-ClArC, we restricted our comparative analysis to
P-ClArC. In addition, for the datasets we use in our experiments (described in Section 3.1), there is not
always a natural way to allocate confounder labels q = 0 and q = 1. For example, we use confounding
concepts like gender or different types of color casts. In such cases, the differentiation between A-ClArC and
P-ClArC becomes blurry, as we arbitrarily decide for one of the two possible confounder values (e.g. male)
to be considered non-confounders and the other value (e.g. female) as confounders for computing the CAV
and reference point z.
RR-ClArC.
RR-ClArC adopts a different strategy from A-ClArC and P-ClArC by modifying the objec-
tive function rather than the model’s architecture. As before, we compute a CAV vc,l that captures the
direction of confounder c using representations al = f (l)
fe (x). But instead of applying a fixed projection to
these representations, RR-ClArC fine-tunes the model with an additional Right-Reason loss term LRR that
penalizes sensitivity to the confounder. The total loss becomes
L = LCR + λLRR
(12)
where LCR denotes the standard cross-entropy loss and LRR enforces insensitivity to the Clever Hans feature
through
LRR =

∇al

m · f (l)
dh (al)

· vc,l
2
.
(13)
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
This new loss term strongly resembles the square of the conceptual sensitivity (Equation 6) used to measure
how strongly the model reacts to a certain concept. The only difference is that RR-ClArC adds a regular-
ization parameter m ∈R|C|, which is a class-specific weighting vector that also enables selective correction:
setting entries at class-specific indices to zero disables correction for these classes. Alternatively, we can
randomly fill m with values from {−1, 1}, which Dreyer et al. have found to improve regularization (Dreyer
et al., 2024). The regularization strength λ acts as a weighting factor for the Right-Reason loss and controls
the trade-off between prediction accuracy and confounder suppression during training.
Alternative formulations replace the squared dot product for computing the Right-Reason loss with the
cosine similarity or the L1 norm, or substitute the logits with the sum of log-probabilities as the gradient
target. The choice of loss variant is treated as a hyperparameter in our experiments.
During fine-tuning, minimizing the combined loss L reduces the model’s gradient alignment with the CAV.
This process forces the model to become less sensitive to the confounder and to base its predictions on causal
features instead. In contrast to P-ClArC, fine-tuning is thus not an optional step for RR-ClArC. Nevertheless,
RR-ClArC brings the advantage of class-specific unlearning, providing more flexibility in multi-class scenar-
ios, while P-ClArC and A-ClArC suppress the spurious correlation across all classes equally. Empirically,
Dreyer et al. report that RR-ClArC, in most cases, outperforms both A-ClArC and P-ClArC, mitigating
Clever Hans behavior the strongest of the examined ClArC methods (Dreyer et al., 2024). However, the
correction quality for all ClArC methods critically depends on the accuracy of the computed CAV. If vc,l
does not correctly represent the confounder’s direction, the projection might not sufficiently suppress the
confounder, or may even suppress important causal information.
An important distinction between our experimental setups and those used in the original ClArC papers
concerns the type and distribution of confounders. While (Anders et al., 2022) and (Dreyer et al., 2024)
primarily investigate discrete, artifact-like confounders that are either present or absent, we generalize this
setting and additionally regard confounders that can take on any value on a continuous range.
Another difference lies in the confounder distribution within the training and validation data. In the original
setups for P-ClArC and RR-ClArC, the confounder appears only in one class, so that one data group is
completely empty (as illustrated in Figure 4). In contrast, our datasets intentionally include both confounder
and non-confounder samples for each class, as Group DRO and DFR require that sufficient instances from all
data groups are available. Additionally, Dreyer et al. fine-tuned their models for a fixed number of ten epochs
(Dreyer et al., 2024) when applying P-ClArC and RR-ClArC, whereas we determined the optimal number
of epochs dynamically by monitoring the average group accuracy on the validation split. This strategy also
required that every data group is represented by at least a few samples. More information about our specific
implementations of the correction methods is provided in section 3.2.
2.5
Counterfactual Explanations
Counterfactual Explainers offer an alternative method for investigating model behavior to feature attribution
techniques such as LRP. Instead of assigning each input feature of a sample a score that indicates how much
it contributed to the model’s output, Counterfactual Explainers aim to alter the sample in a minimal,
but semantically meaningful way so that the model changes its classification decision. By comparing the
original sample with its counterfactual, we learn what features the model considers to be important for the
classification.
Should the altered feature have a causal connection to the source class and target class, this can be an
indicator that the model follows a valid decision strategy. If instead the altered feature is non-causal, this
might indicate the model learned to shortcut the decision process due to a spurious correlation in the training
data. An example for both cases can be found in Figure 5. In this study, we will only focus on so-called Visual
Counterfactual Explainers for image classification (e.g. (Jeanneret et al., 2022; 2023; Bender et al., 2026;
Bender & Morik, 2026; Zeid & Bender, 2026)), even though it is also possible to create counterfactuals in
other domains, e.g. for tabular data Mothilal et al. (2020), natural language Sarkar et al. (2024), graphs Chen
et al. (2023); Bechtoldt & Bender (2026) or proteins Kłos et al. (2026).
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
(a) true counterfactual explanation
(b) false counterfactual explanation
Figure 5: Counterfactual Explanations generated for source class Not Smiling and target class Smiling. From
left to right, each panel shows the original image, its counterfactual, and the per-pixel difference between
the original and the counterfactual. (a) shows a true counterfactual explanation, i.e. the Counterfactual
Explainer changed the causal feature that distinguishes the source and target class by altering the mouth
area in such a way that the depicted person is now actually smiling. (b) shows a false counterfactual, as
the causal feature remains unchanged and instead the opacity of the watermark is increased, hinting at the
model possibly being affected by Clever Hans.
Generating counterfactual explanations is not a trivial task, as there are multiple, sometimes contradictory,
qualities that a good counterfactual explanation has to fulfill. First, changes to the original sample should
be small, i.e. the counterfactual should be located close to the opposite side of the decision boundary,
because we want to ensure that the changes mainly affect features important to the decision strategy.
Simultaneously, the counterfactual should lie on the same data manifold M from which the original sample
originated. Model behavior, in particular behavior of deep Neural Networks, for out-of-distribution data
points is highly unpredictable, so if this requirement is not fulfilled, we would instead create an adversarial
example. Compared to the original image, an adversarial example contains a minimal perturbation which is
often barely visible and can resemble random noise patterns. While it also changes the model’s decision, it
does not provide any information about the concepts on which the model relies (Szegedy et al., 2014; Nguyen
et al., 2015).
In general, changes to the original image must also not be too subtle, i.e. they need to be noticeable
and understandable for human examiners. In addition, we also want there to be diversity when creating
counterfactuals: for a single sample, we want to be able to create a set of counterfactual explanations
that together reveal all relevant features and decision strategies. To make the counterfactual explanations
more easily interpretable, they should also be sparse: ideally, only a single concept should be modified per
generated counterfactual.
Since it is hard to fulfill all those requirements, as there are trade-offs between them, there has been a
lot of research on the topic, leading to the invention of multiple different approaches to counterfactual
creation, each focusing on different qualities, e.g. Diffeomorphic Counterfactuals (DiffeoCF) (Dombrowski
et al., 2024), Diverse Valuable Explanations (DiVE) (Rodríguez et al., 2021), LatentShift Cohen et al.
(2023), Adversarial Visual Counterfactual Explanations (ACE) (Jeanneret et al., 2023), Diffusion Visual
Counterfactual Explanations (DVCE) (Augustin et al., 2022), DiME (Jeanneret et al., 2022), FastDiME
(Weng et al., 2025), Global Counterfactual Directions (GCD) (Sobieski & Biecek, 2025), CDCT Varshney
et al. (2024), DiffAE-CF Ha & Bender (2025), LeapFactual Cao et al. (2025). The method we will concentrate
on in this study, and that will also be used for our CFKD experiments, is called Smooth Counterfactual
Explorer (SCE) (Bender et al., 2026). SCE tries to address all described qualities by combining and improving
traits from existing methods with some own additions. Like other methods, SCE iteratively adapts the
original sample x by Gradient Descent, propagating the Gradients through the decoder part of a Denoising
Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020) for a better alignment with the data manifold M.
However, unlike the other methods, SCE does not compute the gradients using the original model ∇f, but
instead distills the original model into a surrogate model with smoother gradients ∇ˆf. The motivation for this
is that adversarial examples can also exist within M as local generalization errors (Stutz et al., 2019), and,
according to Bender et al., smoothing the classifier’s gradient field helps to prevent getting stuck in these local
minima during the creation of counterfactual explanations. SCE also includes a diversifying mechanism that,
when creating multiple counterfactuals, “locks” directions already used, so the following ones must find a
15
