
===== PAGE 16 =====
different route, i.e. they cannot again modify a feature that was already adapted in previous counterfactual
explanations. Lastly, SCE uses a sparsifier that focuses the explanation on an individual feature, i.e. it
prevents multiple features from being adapted simultaneously in a single counterfactual.
2.6
Counterfactual Knowledge Distillation (CFKD)
Counterfactual Knowledge Distillation (CFKD) (Bender et al., 2023; 2025; Hackstein & Bender, 2025) follows
a different paradigm than the ClArC methods described above. It corrects biased models through an iterative
student-teacher framework by distilling knowledge from an unbiased teacher onto a biased student model
with the help of counterfactual explanations.
As with the ClArC methods, we start with a biased student model that was trained on a dataset containing a
spurious correlation between some confounding feature and the class labels. The teacher would in practice be
a human domain expert, but can be substituted with an unbiased oracle model, making it easier to conduct
large-scale experiments and reproduce results. Based on the student, we generate counterfactual explanations
for each sample in the dataset using the SCE algorithm described above. Since the student is affected by
Clever Hans, a portion of the counterfactual explanations will be false, i.e. the modified feature is a non-
causal confounder. The teacher now evaluates all generated counterfactuals. If, according to the teacher,
the counterfactual still belongs to the source class, we know it is a false counterfactual and it is assigned the
source class label (i.e. same class label as the factual). If the teacher instead agrees that the counterfactual
belongs to the target class, it is considered a true counterfactual. The identified false counterfactuals are
then added to the original dataset, helping to reduce the bias in the dataset by re-balancing the sizes of the
different data groups. This process is illustrated in Figure 6: Creating counterfactual explanation can be
imagined as "pushing" a sample just across the model’s decision boundary. Since the student’s boundary is
skewed by the Clever Hans effect, this process frequently generates false counterfactuals that land within
the sparse, underrepresented minority groups, effectively increasing their population. True counterfactuals,
i.e. counterfactuals that actually modify the causal feature, are discarded. Due to the shape of the Clever
Hans decision boundary, they typically fall within already well-populated majority groups and would only
increase the existing imbalance.
Using the augmented dataset, we can either choose to fine-tune the student or train a new model from
scratch. As the different data group sizes are now (more) balanced, the spurious correlation between the
0
1
Causal Feature
Causal Feature
0
1
Confounder
poor minority group
generalizaon
0
1
0
1
Confounder
Rebalancing through
Counterfactual Explanaons
Class A (no confounder)
Class A (confounder)
Class B (no confounder)
Class B (confounder)
Decision Boundary
Figure 6: Conceptual illustration of dataset rebalancing using CFKD. (Left) An imbalanced training set
leads to a biased Clever Hans decision boundary, where the model incorrectly relies on a spurious correlation
between the confounder and class labels. (Right) CFKD generates ’false’ counterfactuals (indicated by red
arrows), for which only the value of the confounder is modified and the causal feature remains unchanged. By
augmenting the dataset with these new samples, CFKD populates the sparse minority group, consequently
weakening the spurious correlation. Fine-tuning on the augmented dataset hence allows the model to learn
a more robust decision boundary.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
confounder and the class labels no longer holds or is at least weakened, so the student has to learn to rely
on causal features for classification. Should the model still display Clever Hans behavior, this process can
be repeated for multiple iterations.
However, getting a meaningful assessment for this is not trivial, as
the validation data will generally come from the same, biased data distribution as the training data, so
the empirical accuracy on the validation set is not a good estimator for the model’s ability to generalize.
In contrast to ClArC and the other methods we examine, CFKD does not assume access to group labels,
so we also cannot compute the average group accuracy, which would be a more reliable estimator. As an
alternative, Bender et al. propose a new metric called feedback accuracy, which is defined as the proportion
of true counterfactual explanations among all counterfactual explanations created. The intuition is that,
by incorporating the teacher’s feedback in the form of counterfactual explanations labeled by the teacher
into the dataset for the next iteration, the student’s decision boundary will more and more resemble the
decision boundary of the teacher. The teacher will therefore more often agree with the student that the
class label actually changed when creating a counterfactual explanation, so the feedback accuracy increases,
approaching a value of 1. This process can be viewed as the teacher transferring its knowledge to the student,
hence the name Counterfactual Knowledge Distillation. Since we assume that the teacher (human expert or
oracle model) is an unbiased classifier, aligning the student’s decision boundary with the teacher results in
the student unlearning the bias.
Bender et al. successfully apply CFKD for varying degrees of dataset poisoning, and show that, because
CFKD is able to augment the dataset using false counterfactuals, it can even mitigate model bias when
the correlation between the confounder and the class targets equals 1, i.e. when the minority groups are
completely empty (Bender et al., 2023). All other correction methods we examine can not be applied in such
a scenario, as Group DRO and DFR require samples from all data groups, and the ClArC methods need
at least one class represented by both confounder and non-confounder samples for computing an accurate
CAV.
If there are multiple confounding features present in the dataset, CFKD theoretically has no problems to
correct for them simultaneously, as SCE creates a set of counterfactual explanations for a single sample, each
modifying a different feature that the student thinks is relevant for classification. However, its application
to multiclass classification remains challenging, as counterfactual explanations are typically generated for a
single class transition at a time. Scaling to a multiclass setting would require generating multiple times more
counterfactual explanations per sample, which could quickly become infeasible.
2.7
Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR)
Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR) (Kirichenko et al., 2023) is a correction method that, in contrast to the
previously described methods, is not XAI-based. As for the other methods, the starting point is a student
model trained with plain ERM on a dataset D exhibiting a spurious correlation. Again, the student will be
able to achieve high accuracy on the majority groups thanks to Clever Hans, but will fail for unseen minority
group samples where the spurious correlation breaks. To correct the model with DFR, we create a new
dataset ˆD, in which all data groups contain the same number of samples, so there no longer is a spurious
correlation between the confounder and the class labels. Then, we fine-tune the last layer of the student
model for a few epochs on ˆD, which, according to Kirichenko et al., is enough to remove or at least mitigate
the bias learned by the model (Kirichenko et al., 2023). Similarly to the ClArC methods, DFR can be seen
as splitting the model into a feature extractor, which extends from the input to the penultimate layer, and
a downstream head, i.e. the last, fully connected layer acting as the classifier. The assumption is that the
feature extractor still learns to extract the causal features when it is trained on the poisoned dataset D, but
that the confounding feature is simply heavily upweighted in the downstream head, resulting in Clever Hans
behavior. Fine-tuning the last layer on unbiased ˆD therefore leads to a reweighting of the extracted features
in favor of the causal features. Unlike the ClArC method, where layer l after which to split the model is
defined as a hyperparameter, DFR always splits the model after the penultimate layer.
To create the unbiased dataset ˆD, we need a sufficient amount of samples annotated with groups labels.
Similarly to the ClArC methods, these either have to be known in prior or can be obtained via SpRAy.
According to Kirichenko et al., a small number of samples for ˆD is sufficient to noticeably reduce reliance on
the confounder. In their own experiment, the size of ˆD was a quarter of the size of the original training dataset
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
D, which was sufficient to yield similar results as state-of-the-arts methods like Group DRO. Preferably, ˆD
should not be a subset of D, as this is reported to reduce the improvements that can be achieved with DFR.
Instead, one should construct a hold-out set from the data before training the student that is reserved for
the DFR fine-tuning.
One possible drawback of DFR is that, since all data groups should have the same number of samples in
ˆD, the size of the smallest minority group also dictates the size of all other groups. Depending on the total
number of samples and the degree of poisoning, this number can be very small, especially in scenarios with
very limited data availability and strong spurious correlations. As a consequence, ˆD might only contain very
few samples, independent of whether ˆD is a subset of D or a held-out set. Multiclass settings or the presence
of multiple confounders might make this problem even more severe, because the dataset is fractured into
even smaller groups. The few samples are possibly no longer representative of the general data distribution
within their respective groups, so using them for fine-tuning the student might fail to improve generalization.
2.8
Group Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO)
Group Distributionally Robust Optimization (Group DRO) (Hu et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020) is a
specialized, structured variant of Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) (Delage & Ye, 2010; Ben-
Tal et al., 2013; Duchi et al., 2021). DRO itself is an optimization framework that acts as an alternative
to standard ERM optimization: Instead of minimizing the average loss for the training data, DRO tries
to minimize the worst-case loss over an uncertainty set of distributions. This uncertainty set should be
representative for all possible data distributions that the model should be able to generalize to. This helps
to prevent Clever Hans, as a spurious correlation that is present in the original training data will ideally
not be present in all of the distributions of the uncertainty set. Since we optimize for the worst-case loss,
the model is forced to learn a decision strategy that is valid for all the distributions, which should only be
possible by relying on actual causal features.
There are different strategies for creating the uncertainty set, e.g. using ϕ-divergences, such as the KL
divergence, or the Wasserstein distance (Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn, 2018; Gao &
Kleywegt, 2023). Instead, Group DRO assumes that group labels are available to us for both the training
and validation data, and simply creates the uncertainty set by grouping the samples by their group labels.
But in place of optimizing by only selecting samples from the group with the highest loss at each iteration
step, we use an improved version of the training algorithm by Sagawa et al. (Sagawa et al., 2020) that
updates the model for all groups at each step, but maintains a weighting factor wg per group g used to scale
the individual group losses, and which is larger for groups that had larger loss in the past. According to the
authors, this increases stability and convergence, while still focusing the model’s training on the group(s)
for which it performs poorly.
Following the (Group) DRO optimization framework in theory ensures low training loss for the minority
groups. However, this does not guarantee high test accuracy for these groups as well. Powerful models such
as large DNNs are capable of simply overfitting minority group samples, so even when they mainly rely
on Clever Hans features, they still achieve perfect (or nearly perfect) minority group performance on the
training data. Focusing on the group with the highest loss during optimization therefore can still yield a
similarly biased classifier as ERM that generalizes poorly under distribution shifts. Sagawa et al. address
this issue by applying strong regularization (in particular weight decay) and early stopping, preventing the
model from overfitting minority group samples for decreasing worst group loss during training, so that it
instead has to rely on actually causal concepts (Sagawa et al., 2020).
Sagawa et al. also introduce an additional hyperparameter called model capacity C (Sagawa et al., 2020). For
each group size ng, they compute
C
√ng and add the result to the loss of group g before calculating the overall
loss and updating the model weights. This adds additional weight to the minority groups during optimization,
giving even more priority to fitting them correctly (while preventing overfitting through regularization), as
they usually generalize worse.
Using ground-truth group labels, Group-DRO is reported to significantly improve worst-group performance
on unseen data compared to standard ERM training on biased datasets, both in imaging (Waterbirds (Sagawa
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
et al., 2020), CelebA (Liu et al., 2015)) and natural language processing (MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018))
tasks. However, contrary to DFR and the ClArC methods, Group DRO requires group labels for all training
and validation samples. Again, since group labels often are not available in practice, SpRAy or manual
labeling will often be necessary to be able to use Group DRO.
3
Experimental Design
This section outlines the experimental setup that forms the basis of our comparative analysis. We begin by
introducing the datasets used in the evaluation and emphasize the underlying data distributions regarding
both the causal and confounding features and how they correlate with the classification targets. We then
provide information about our implementation of each correction method, including hyperparameter tuning
procedures and model selection criteria, to enable a transparent and reproducible comparison.
Finally,
we present the baseline student classifiers before correction and quantify the severity of their Clever Hans
behavior.
3.1
Datasets
We evaluate the correction methods on five datasets: Squares, CelebA Smiling, CelebA Blond, Camelyon17,
and Follicles.
This selection includes both synthetic and real-world data and allows us to evaluate the
correction methods for varying degrees of complexity regarding the true causal feature and the confounding
feature.
By including Camelyon17 and Follicles, we also incorporate possible practical scenarios in the
medical field, a domain where robust generalization and reliance on exclusively true, causal features are
especially important.
The task to be solved on all datasets is a binary classification problem, i.e. the ML model has to correctly
predict the class label t ∈{0, 1} associated with an input sample. In conjunction with two possible values for
the true confounder label q ∈{0, 1}, there are consequently four different data groups within each dataset:
1. A−= {xi | ti = 0 ∧qi = 0} — non-confounder instances from class A
2. A+ = {xi | ti = 0 ∧qi = 1} — confounder instances from class A
3. B−= {xi | ti = 1 ∧qi = 0} — non-confounder instances from class B
4. B+ = {xi | ti = 1 ∧qi = 1} — confounder instances from class B
For all datasets except Follicles, we construct two poisoned variants, one with a symmetric and one with
an asymmetric distribution of the confounding feature across the two classes. In the symmetric version,
98% of samples in class A will have the true confounder label q = 0, while only 2% of samples have q = 1.
Conversely, 2% of samples in class B will have q = 0, and 98% will have q = 1. Hence, the respective relative
group sizes are [A−: 49%; A+ : 1%; B−: 1%; B+ : 49%], so the distribution of the confounding feature
within class A is inversely symmetrical to the distribution in class B. Nevertheless, individually the true
class and confounder labels are evenly distributed across the dataset, i.e. half of the samples belong to class
A and the other half belongs to class B, and analogous, half the samples have the true confounding label
q = 0 and the other half q = 1.
In the asymmetric version, class A consists of 50% samples with q = 0 and 50% samples with q = 1, while
class B consists of 98% samples with q = 0 and 2% samples with q = 1. This leads to relative group sizes of
[A−: 25%; A+ : 25%; B−: 49%; B+ : 1%], making the distributions of the confounder in the two classes
asymmetrical. In addition, while still half of the samples belong to class A and half of the samples belong
to class B, the confounding feature is no longer evenly distributed across the dataset: Now, 74% of samples
have the true confounder label q = 0, while only 26% of samples have q = 1.
Figure 7 shows a sketch of the data distributions of both the symmetric and the asymmetric dataset versions.
Additionally, it depicts the theoretically optimal decision boundary as well as the Clever Hans decision
boundary that a model will learn due to the spurious correlation of the confounder with the class labels. Note
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
0
1
Causal Feature
0
1
Confounder
Class A (no confounder)
Class A (confounder)
Class B (no confounder)
Class B (confounder)
Ideal Decision Boundary
Clever Hans Decision Boundary
(a) symmetric version
0
1
Causal Feature
0
1
Confounder
(b) asymmetric version
Figure 7: Generalized depictions of (a) the symmetric and (b) the asymmetric dataset distributions in the
training and validation splits. The perfect decision boundary is a vertical line in the center, separating the
two classes based on the value of the true, causal feature. Because of the simplicity bias, models trained on
these datasets will prefer exploiting the confounder as a shortcut feature instead of basing their decision on
the causal feature. Clever Hans "pushes" the decision boundary horizontally into the area of the minority
group samples, thereby sacrificing accuracy on the minority groups in exchange for easily classifying majority
group samples correctly. Due to their small number, minority group samples can be overfitted in order to
achieve perfect training accuracy, with poor generalization for the minority groups as a consequence.
that the severity of the Clever Hans effect, and therefore the deviation between the learned decision boundary
and the optimal solution, will vary for the different datasets. Datasets with more complex confounding
features and simpler causal features likely lead to less biased models, as complexity makes the confounder
harder to be exploited as a shortcut feature.
Both the symmetric and the asymmetric dataset versions are limited to only 1000 samples, of which 800
are allocated to the train split and 200 samples are allocated to the validation split. As a consequence,
the minority groups will be represented by only 8 samples in the train split, and only 2 samples in the
validation split. There are multiple reasons why we chose this specific setting for our experiments. First,
we wanted to keep the number of samples small, because in practical scenarios (e.g. in the medical domain),
where preventing Clever Hans behavior is especially relevant, training data often will also be limited. In
addition, methods like DFR and Group DRO have already been shown to yield good results when a sufficient
amount of samples annotated with true confounder labels is readily available (i.e. minority groups were still
represented by multiple hundreds of instances in the training data (Kirichenko et al., 2023; Izmailov et al.,
2022; Koh et al., 2021; Sagawa et al., 2020)). We think it is more interesting to evaluate their performance
in more challenging scenarios, with small group sizes and a very strong spurious correlation between the
confounder and the target label.
Compared to the training and validation splits, the test splits are much larger and contain a representative
amount of minority group samples so that the reported results reflect the true generalization capabilities of
the corrected models. The test splits of Squares, CelebA Smiling, and Camelyon17 are unpoisoned, i.e. all
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
data groups contain the same amount of samples, with the smallest being the Squares test split with a size
of 1600 samples (400 per group). The test split for Camelyon17 contains 6800 samples (1700 per group) and
the one for CelebA Smiling contains 19400 samples (4850 per group). For CelebA Blond, we use 20260 of
the remaining images to create the test set, in which the minority group is represented by 165 samples.
As already mentioned, the only exception to the pattern described above is the Follicles dataset. The reason
for this is that Follicles is a real-world medical dataset with a highly limited number of samples, so it is not
possible to conduct further sub-sampling for reaching the same symmetric and asymmetric data distributions
used with the other datasets. Instead, we will use the Follicles dataset as is. This way, we cover a real-world
classification task containing a real spurious correlation that was not artificially created or strengthened
by our setting. The Follicles data distribution and the sizes of the train, validation, and test split will be
described in detail in section 3.1.5.
3.1.1
Squares
The Squares dataset is a synthetic dataset that consists of 64 × 64 images with only two important features:
The Foreground Intensity, which refers to the brightness of the small, red square, and the Background
Intensity, which refers to the brightness of the background. Both are continuous and can take on values in
the interval [0.0, 1.0]. The x and y coordinates of the foreground square are determined uniformly at random.
For solving the binary classification problem, the classifier must learn to distinguish between images of Class
A with a dark foreground (values in [0.0, 0.5)) and images of Class B with a bright foreground (values in
[0.5, 1.0]), meaning the foreground intensity is the causal feature that the classifier should rely on. In the
poisoned versions of this dataset, the background intensity is correlated with the class labels, so it acts as
a Clever Hans feature that can be exploited by the classifier. Samples with a background intensity < 0.5
are considered to have a dark background and are assigned the true confounder label q = 1. Conversely,
samples with a background intensity ≥0.5 have a bright background and are assigned the true confounder
label q = 0. To make the task more challenging, mild gaussian noise is added on top of all images. Figure 8
provides randomly selected samples from the Squares dataset, illustrating the distinction between the four
data groups.
Class A
low foreground intensity (< 0.5)
low background intensity (< 0.5)
low foreground intensity (< 0.5)
high background intensity (> 0.5)
Class B
high foreground intensity (> 0.5)
low background intensity (< 0.5)
high foreground intensity (> 0.5)
high background intensity (> 0.5)
Figure 8: Randomly selected samples of the Squares dataset grouped by their respective foreground and
background intensities.
Class A contains samples with low foreground intensity ([0.0, 0.5]) and Class B
contains samples with high foreground intensity ([0.5, 1.0]). In the poisoned versions of this dataset, the
background intensity acts as a Clever Hans feature.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
3.1.2
CelebA Smiling
The original CelebFaces Attributes (CelebA) dataset (Liu et al., 2015) comprises 202599 images of faces of
celebrities, each annotated with 40 binary labels to indicate the presence of specific facial attributes of the
depicted person. For our experiments, we only regard the Smiling label, i.e. we convert the task to a binary
classification problem so that the classifier has to distinguish between the two classes Not Smiling (Class
A) and Smiling (Class B). We also downsize the images to a uniform size of 128 × 128 pixels. In addition,
we artificially add a watermark in the lower right corner of each sample. The confounder, i.e. the feature
spuriously correlated to the target label, is the opaqueness of this watermark. Similar to the confounder
for the Squares dataset, the opaqueness of the watermark is continuous and can take on values in the range
[0.0, 1.0], with 0.0 being completely transparent and 1.0 being completely opaque. Samples with a watermark
opaqueness of < 0.5 are annotated with the true confounder label q = 0, and samples with a watermark
opaqueness of ≥0.5 will have confounder label q = 1. The four distinct data groups are visualized in Figure
9.
Class A
Not Smiling
Transparent Copyright Tag
Not Smiling
Opaque Copyright Tag
Class B
Smiling
Transparent Copyright Tag
Smiling
Opaque Copyright Tag
Figure 9: Randomly selected samples of the CelebA dataset, where we added a watermark of varying opacity
to each sample in order to artificially introduce a confounding feature. The samples are grouped by the two
target classes, Smiling and Not Smiling, and by the opacity of their watermark (< 0.5 as transparent and
≥0.5 as opaque)
3.1.3
CelebA Blond
Like CelebA Smiling, CelebA Blond is based on the original CelebA dataset. Again, we downsize the images
to 128 × 128 pixels and create a binary classification task by selecting the attribute label Blond as the
classification target our model should learn to predict. Class A is comprised of images showing non-blond
persons, and Class B contains the blond persons’ images.
To introduce a spurious correlation for the model to exploit, we no longer artificially create a confounder,
such as a watermark of varying opaqueness. Instead, we simply use another of the provided attribute labels:
the Male label, with q = 0 indicating a female person and q = 1 indicating a male person. While the labels
Blond and Male are already correlated in the original dataset, we still perform sub-sampling in a controlled
way until the sizes of the data groups match the specifications described earlier. Randomly selected samples
from each data group are shown in Figure 10.
Compared to the confounders in the other datasets, the spurious feature in CelebA Blond, i.e. the gender,
is arguably the most complex. When deriving the gender from facial attributes, a multitude of simpler
features, which individually are not necessarily associated with one specific gender, have to be examined
and weighted. Among others, the simpler features include the presence of a beard, hairstyle, shape of the
chin, shape of the eyebrows, and presence of makeup. This complexity presumably makes it harder for a
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Class A
Not Blond
Female
Not Blond
Male
Class B
Blond
Female
Blond
Male
Figure 10: Randomly selected samples of the CelebA dataset, grouped by the two target classes Not Blond
(Class A) and Blond (Class B), and by the confounding feature, which is the gender of the depicted person.
model trained on CelebA Blond to exploit gender as a shortcut feature, so we expect the student models
to be affected less severely by Clever Hans. As we will see, it also negatively impacts the quality of SpRAy
results, because the different decision-making strategies represented by LRP attribution maps cannot be
as easily and unambiguously clustered. Further difficulty is introduced by the fact that the ground-truth
attribute labels provided with CelebA are known to be inconsistent and even inaccurate to some degree (see
e.g. Lingenfelter et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2023)), so our classifiers and the applied correction methods need
to possess a certain robustness to noisy labels.
3.1.4
Camelyon17
Camelyon17 is a histopathological dataset that contains microscopic images of either healthy tissue (Class
A) or tissue containing breast cancer metastases (Class B). Before conducting the experiments, we scale the
images to sizes of 128 × 128 pixels. In the original dataset, there are four different possible hospitals from
which the images can originate, but for our experiments, we only use the samples from two of the hospitals.
Figure 11 shows that, depending on their hospital of origin, there is a clear distinction in the coloring of the
images. This coloring is spuriously correlated with the presence of cancer metastases in the image, i.e. it is
correlated with the target label, and therefore acts as a Clever Hans feature.
Note that this is a scenario that could reasonably occur when applying computer-aided diagnosis in practice.
One could imagine that one of the hospitals mainly conducts preventive medical examinations, so most
microscopic images from this hospital would depict healthy tissue. The other hospital could be specialized
in the treatment of breast cancer and therefore have mostly patients who already tested positive for the
disease. Tissue samples from this hospital would show signs of cancer metastases at a much higher rate.
When images from both hospitals are used in the same dataset, and the hospitals do not produce the images
under the same conditions, there is a risk that equipment-specific artifacts, such as e.g. a color cast, strongly
correlate with the task-relevant histological signs of cancer. A model trained on this dataset will use this
confounding feature as a shortcut to distinguish between healthy and cancerous tissue, while actually learning
to distinguish between different lab equipment. This kind of model would probably fail in the event of a
distribution shift, e.g. when confronted with images from hospitals not represented in the dataset. As the
test split for assessing the model’s generalization capabilities would likely come from the same distribution as
the training and validation data, this Clever Hans effect might easily be overlooked, with possibly disastrous
consequences for the patients. Similar behavior has been observed already in ML models that were trained
to diagnose pneumonia (Zech et al., 2018).
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Class A
Healthy Tissue
Hospital A
Healthy Tissue
Hospital B
Class B
Cancerous Tissue
Hospital A
Cancerous Tissue
Hospital B
Figure 11: Randomly selected samples of the CAMELYON17 dataset grouped by presence of cancer metas-
tases (classification target) and hospital of origin (confounder). Images from hospital A depict a pink color
cast, while images from hospital B tend to be more purple.
3.1.5
Follicles
The Follicles dataset consists of microscopic images of ovarian follicles and was originally introduced in
Bender et al. (2023). The task is to classify the maturation stage of each follicle as either primordial (Class
A) or growing (Class B). The correct causal feature for this distinction is the number of granulosa cell layers:
a single ring-layer indicates a primordial follicle, while additional cells inside the ring or multiple ring-layers
indicate a growing follicle. However, the maturation stage is strongly correlated with the size of the follicle,
even though the size itself is not a valid criterion on which to rely for classification and therefore acts as a
naturally occurring confounder. The four data groups can be seen in Figure 12
As already mentioned, unlike the other datasets in this study, Follicles is relatively small and therefore
cannot be resampled into the symmetric and asymmetric poisoned variants described above. Instead, we
will use the Follicles dataset in its original form. The full dataset contains 1507 images downsized to a shape
of 256 × 256 pixels, with 931 images of primordial follicles and 576 images of growing follicles. Among the
primordial follicles, 776 are small (confounder label q = 0) and 155 are large (q = 1). Among the growing
follicles, 117 are small (q = 0) and 459 are large (q = 1). Hence, the relative group sizes within the dataset
are approximately [A−: 51.5%; A+ : 10.3%; B−: 7.8%; B+ : 30.5%]. This distribution results in a strong
group imbalance, with the majority of primordial follicles being small and the majority of growing follicles
being large.
Because of the limited number of samples, we cannot construct large test sets like we did for the other
datasets without impeding the training process by reducing the size of the training split. Instead, we adopt
a more standard split strategy: 80% of the data for training, 10% for validation, and 10% for testing.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
Class A
Growing
Large
Growing
Small
Class B
Primordial
Large
Primordial
Small
Figure 12: Randomly selected samples from the Follicles dataset, grouped by the two target classes Pri-
mordial (Class A) and Growing (Class B), and by the confounding feature, which is the size of the depicted
follicle. Surrounding tissue is covered by a mask in order to help the model focus on the follicle.
3.2
Implementation details
For the comparative analysis, we apply the XAI-based correction methods CFKD, P-ClArC, and RR-ClArC
to mitigate Clever Hans behavior in biased student models. Both P-ClArC and RR-ClArC are evaluated
twice, once using the true confounder labels and once using labels obtained via SpRAy, to assess how
label quality influences correction performance and to determine each method’s robustness to imperfect
supervision.
As non-XAI-based baselines, we additionally correct with DFR and Group DRO, applying
the same dual-evaluation protocol with true and SpRAy-derived group labels.
All correction techniques
are applied to the identical student models to ensure strict comparability and to isolate the effects of the
correction procedures from architectural or initialization variance. The source code is provided alongside our
study.
Evaluation Metrics.
Instead of relying on the empirical test accuracy, i.e. overall accuracy across all test
samples, as the primary evaluation metric, we report the average group accuracy (AGA) on the test data.
This metric is obtained by calculating the classification accuracy within each of the four data groups (A−,
A+, B−, B+) and then taking the arithmetic mean of these values. In addition, we compute the worst
group accuracy (WGA), defined as the minimum accuracy among the four groups. These metrics provide
a more reliable measure of generalization under distribution shifts, as they explicitly account for subgroup
performance. In contrast, empirical accuracy is often misleading in biased datasets because it is dominated
by majority groups, which benefit from the spurious correlations that the correction methods are designed to
remove. Consequently, models that achieve high empirical accuracy may still generalize poorly to minority
subgroups or new environments where these correlations no longer hold. The main objective for all correction
methods is therefore to maximize the average group accuracy, as it reflects balanced performance across all
groups without making any assumptions about their individual importance.
Training the students.
We trained one student model for each of the poisoned datasets introduced
in Section 3.1. All classifiers follow the ResNet-18 architecture (He et al., 2016b) as implemented in the
PyTorch Torchvision library1. We did not use any precomputed weights for initialization, i.e. all weights
were initialized randomly. Each model was trained using standard ERM for a maximum of 300 epochs, with
the regularization strength gradually increasing over time. After each epoch, we computed the empirical
1https://docs.pytorch.org/vision/main/models/generated/torchvision.models.resnet18.html
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
accuracy on the validation set and eventually retained the model achieving the highest validation accuracy
as the biased baseline.
These baseline models serve as the starting point for all subsequent correction
procedures, ensuring a consistent comparison of the effectiveness of each method in mitigating Clever Hans
behavior.
SpRAy Implementation.
When the true confounder labels were not assumed to be available, we first
applied Spectral Relevance Analysis (SpRAy) for obtaining them. The first step is to compute attribution
scores for all training and validation samples. Although we can theoretically use any attribution-based XAI
technique for this purpose, we decided to use CRP (Achtibat et al., 2023) as implemented in the zennit-crp
Python package2. This choice aligns with the implementation used in the RR-ClArC experiments provided by
Dreyer et al., which can be found at https://github.com/frederikpahde/rrclarc and which we adopted
as a reference because SpRAy had previously been applied only in the original P-ClArC paper (Anders et al.,
2022), for which no official implementation was released.
To obtain high-quality labels with minimal misclassification, we experimented with different model layers l
(starting from the penultimate layer) for computing attribution scores and with varying numbers of eigen-
values k for generating the spectral embedding. We also compared different preprocessing strategies, such as
using raw attribution scores, channel-wise averaging, or downsampling for potentially improving robustness.
We then apply different clustering techniques (k-Means, Agglomerative Clustering, DBSCAN, HDBSCAN)
to the Spectral Embedding to automatically generate the SpRAy labels. Additionally, we manually explored
the embedded data by computing t-SNE and UMAP visualizations, so that we can judge the quality of the
automatic labeling. When required, these visualizations also allowed for manual annotation of clusters using
ViRelAy (Anders et al., 2026). We assume enough prior knowledge about the data domain to be able to
determine if the computed clusters reflect a valid or a Clever Hans decision strategy.
We generated confounder labels for both the training and validation sets. In case we were unable to achieve
a satisfactory separation between confounders and non-confounders for a dataset, neither automatically nor
manually, we conducted experiments only with the true confounder labels. For some datasets, acceptable
clusters were eventually identified, but their discovery required extensive hyperparameter tuning. Conse-
quently, it is questionable whether a practitioner without prior knowledge about the nature and distribution
of the confounder, or even its presence, could reproduce the same results. We elaborate this problem in more
detail in section 4.1.
P-ClArC and RR-ClArC Implementation.
After acquiring group labels through SpRAy, we computed
the Concept Activation Vector (CAV) required for both P-ClArC and RR-ClArC. When true confounder
labels were assumed to be known, we directly began from this step. For both methods, we conducted an
extensive grid search to identify optimal hyperparameters. P-ClArC and RR-ClArC share the hyperparam-
eters regarding CAV computation. These included the layer l at which the base model f was divided into a
feature extractor f(l)
fe
and a downstream head f(l)
dh , the CAV mode (max pooling, mean aggregation, or no
reduction), the target class, and the CAV type (a linear SVM-based vector or a PCAV).
In datasets where there is no natural way to label samples as confounders or non-confounders (e.g. for
the color cast due to different hospitals of origin in Camelyon17), we treated the label orientation, i.e.
deciding which confounder variant corresponded to q = 0 or q = 1, as an additional hyperparameter, as it
determines the CAV’s direction and the reference point z for the P-ClArC projection. P-ClArC introduced
no further hyperparameters, as the position at which to add the projection layer (projection location) is
already determined by l. For RR-ClArC, we additionally optimized the regularization parameters λ and m
as well as the function type (square of the dot product or cosine similarity) for the RR-ClArC loss term.
Both methods involved fine-tuning the corrected model for up to 100 epochs. After completing the hyperpa-
rameter search, including the optimal number of epochs for fine-tuning, we selected the configuration that
achieved the highest average group accuracy on the validation set. Preliminary comparisons of validation-
based selection using average group accuracy versus average group loss showed no substantial differences.
2https://github.com/rachtibat/zennit-crp
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
CFKD Implementation.
For CFKD, we first trained a generative model based on a Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Model (DDPM) on the same poisoned subset that was used for training the student model.
Additionally, we trained an oracle model on an unpoisoned dataset version (i.e. all data groups contain the
same number of instances) to act as a substitute for a human expert. The oracle solves the same classification
task as the biased student but is unaffected by spurious correlations, allowing it to serve as a reliable reference
for evaluating counterfactuals generated with the help of the DDPM. Accordingly, we assume a practitioner
would have enough domain knowledge to manually classify samples, even those from minority groups, with
high accuracy.
During the CFKD procedure, we generated four counterfactual explanations per training and validation
sample using SCE (Bender et al., 2026).
The oracle then evaluated each counterfactual: if the oracle’s
prediction matched the class label of the source sample (i.e. the factual), the counterfactual was labeled false
and retained the source label; if the oracle’s prediction switched, it was labeled true and assigned the target
class label. Only the false counterfactual explanations were used to augment the dataset, as they primarily
increase the representation of minority groups and thereby mitigate the spurious correlation between the
confounder and the target class. But even if they should not belong to the minority group, they still live
in regions of the data distributions for which the student and the teacher disagree, i.e. where the student
classifies samples wrongly. Increasing training and validation data density for these regions improves model
performance for these regions, thereby improving generalization for regions that were underrepresented in
the training and validation data before.
We then fine-tuned the last layer of the student model on the augmented dataset for up to 20 epochs
while monitoring the performance on the validation set. Because CFKD does not assume knowledge about
group labels, we could not compute the average group accuracy for model selection as in other correction
methods.
Instead, we chose the optimal number of fine-tuning epochs based on the feedback accuracy.
We conducted only a single iteration of the CFKD process, because this is usually sufficient to notably
enhance generalization for minority groups, and additional iterations offer diminishing returns.
Despite
this restriction, CFKD remains the most computationally demanding method in our analysis due to the
counterfactual generation process, so limiting the process to a single iteration also improved fairness regarding
resource utilization.
This design choice, as well as all other hyperparameter settings for CFKD and SCE, closely followed the
reference implementation provided by Bender et al. (2023), which can be found at https://github.com/
Explainable-AI-Berlin/pytorch_explain_and_adapt_library.
DFR Implementation.
As described in section 2.7, it is highly recommended to use held-out data for
constructing the balanced fine-tuning set when applying DFR. However, in our setting, the data is intention-
ally very limited, so reserving some samples for later use with DFR would mean training the original student
on a smaller dataset with even fewer minority group samples. Since all correction methods are applied to
the exact them students for comparability, they would be impacted by this decision as well, even though
they have no use for the additional held-out data. As an alternative, we could provide DFR with additional
samples just for fine-tuning, but having additional data available would also constitute an unfair advantage
over the other methods. The task for all examined methods should be identical and simulate real-world
scenarios: they should mitigate the student’s Clever Hans behavior, receiving only the student model and
the original training and validation data as input. Consequently, we decided to use a balanced subset of the
student’s training data for DFR fine-tuning. While ensuring methodological consistency, this design choice
likely reduced DFR’s effectiveness, which should be kept in mind.
For all datasets except Follicles, each of the four data groups in the DFR fine-tuning set consisted of eight
samples, which corresponds to the size of the minority groups in the original training data, resulting in
32 samples in total. For Follicles, the smallest group contains 93 training samples, yielding a total of 372
samples for DFR fine-tuning. During fine-tuning, we monitored the AGA on the validation data after each
epoch and selected the best-performing model.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
DFR does not introduce any additional hyperparameters beyond those used for standard ERM training, e.g.
learning rate and weight decay. We used the default Pytorch SGD optimizer3 with a learning rate of 0.01
and no regularization.
Group DRO Implementation.
While Group DRO is normally used as an alternative to ERM when
training a model from scratch, we instead used it post hoc on the already biased students to ensure compa-
rability with the other correction methods. In contrast to DFR, Group DRO updates the parameters in all
model layers rather than only the final layer, enabling the method to adjust internal representations as well
as the classification head.
The key hyperparameters for Group DRO are the weight decay factor λ and the model capacity C. We
evaluated several values for λ ∈{1.0, 0.5, 0.1, 0.05, 0.01} and found that λ = 0.1 generally yielded the best
results. This might seem like an unusually large weight decay factor, but as explained in Section 2.8, Group
DRO benefits from strong regularization to reduce the likelihood of overfitting minority group samples. For
C, we adopted an algorithm by Sagawa et al. which dynamically adjusts C during training. The algorithm
itself is not described by Sagawa et al. (2020), but can be found in the provided implementation at https:
//github.com/kohpangwei/group_DRO. This code served as the main reference for our own implementation,
also regarding other hyperparameter choices: Consequently, we used the PyTorch SGD optimizer and set
the learning rate to 0.0001, together with a momentum factor of 0.9.
While applying Grup DRO to the student, we tracked the AGA on the validation data after each epoch and
selected the model with the highest validation AGA as the final corrected version. The maximum validation
performance was typically reached after several hundred epochs.
3.3
Uncorrected classifiers
Table 1 summarizes the performance of the uncorrected student models before applying any correction
method. All students achieved high empirical accuracies on both the training and validation data. However,
due to the spurious correlations present in the datasets, tuning by empirical accuracy on the validation set
yielded models exhibiting pronounced Clever Hans behavior. Performance on minority groups, where the
confounder cannot be exploited as a shortcut feature, is consistently poor, leading to low average group
accuracies (AGA) and worst group accuracies (WGA) on validation and test data. Nevertheless, on the
training set, students often still achieved perfect accuracy scores for minority groups due to overfitting. On
unseen data, however, WGA was in several cases below 10%, illustrating the severity of the model bias.
This effect was particularly strong for the symmetric dataset versions, where the confounder–target correla-
tion is more pronounced and there are two data groups underrepresented in the training data. In contrast,
models trained on asymmetric versions, where the correlation is weaker and where there is only one mi-
nority group, tended to achieve higher AGA. The complexity of the confounding feature also influenced
model behavior: when the confounder was simple (e.g., background intensity in Squares or watermark opac-
ity in CelebA Smiling), models relied almost exclusively on it, resulting in steep accuracy drops for minority
groups and hence especially low WGAs. Conversely, datasets with more complex confounders (e.g., gender
in CelebA Blond) produced models that were less severely affected by Clever Hans effects. As described
earlier, this aligns with findings by Shah et al. (2020) that neural networks often depict a simplicity bias,
i.e. they tend to prefer simpler features and to ignore the more complex ones.
Figure 13 visualizes the decision boundaries learned by the uncorrected models trained on symmetric and
asymmetric Squares. The Squares data are synthetic and defined by only two numerical features, so we can
create new images in a grid pattern and plot the respective confidence scores (i.e. output logits), making it
possible to represent the classifier’s behavior in two-dimensional space. The plots show that both models
strongly rely on the confounding feature. For the symmetric case (Figure 13a), the decision boundary is
nearly horizontal, indicating that the model disregards the causal feature entirely. This finding is consistent
with the scores in Table 1, as an AGA of approximately 50% and a WGA of almost 0% on the test split
indicate nearly perfect accuracy for majority groups (A+ and B−) and complete failure for the minority
groups (A−and B+). Similarly, the model trained on asymmetric Squares (figure 13b) also classified nearly
3https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.SGD.html
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Table 1: Accuracies achieved by the uncorrected student models on training, validation, and test data. The
test splits for Squares, CelebA Smiling, and Camelyon17 are balanced, i.e. all data groups have the same size,
so here the empirical accuracy and the AGA are equal. In contrast, the data distributions in the test splits
for CelebA Blond and Follicles are more similar to the distribution on the validation and training splits.
Dataset
Train accuracy
Validation accuracy
Test accuracy
empirical
AGA
WGA
empirical
AGA
WGA
empirical
AGA
WGA
Squares
symmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
97.5
49.7
0.0
51.1
51.1
1.8
Squares
asymmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
92.0
68.7
0.0
68.1
68.1
12.0
Smiling
symmetric
89.8
55.0
12.5
94.0
48.0
0.0
51.3
51.3
7.3
Smiling
asymmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
77.5
56.7
0.0
59.4
59.4
1.0
Blond
symmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
92.0
71.4
50.0
80.3
72.7
38.2
Blond
asymmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
89.0
79.2
50.0
86.9
76.2
40.6
Camelyon17
symmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
99.0
75.0
0.0
55.3
55.3
9.2
Camelyon17
asymmetric
100.0
100.0
100.0
88.5
77.5
0.5
75.4
75.4
42.1
Follicles
89.4
77.2
49.4
89.3
79.2
54.2
84.5
72.5
48.1
all minority group samples (B+) incorrectly. In addition, the unequal sizes of the majority groups also
reduced the model’s confidence for data in A−that lie close to the distribution of B−.
These results confirm that models trained under standard ERM systematically exploit confounding features
as shortcuts when strong spurious correlations are present. This baseline evaluation thus provides a reference
point for assessing the effectiveness of the correction methods, which we evaluate and compare in the following
section.
4
Results and Discussion
Building upon the experimental setup outlined in Section 3, this section presents the outcomes of our
comparative evaluation of the selected correction methods. We report quantitative results for all datasets,
analyze the impact of each method on group-balanced generalization, and discuss qualitative findings that
provide further insight into the strengths and limitations of the individual approaches.
Performance was evaluated on the test splits introduced in Section 3.1 using two complementary metrics:
average group accuracy (AGA) and worst group accuracy (WGA). Both metrics explicitly account for sub-
group performance and thus provide a more reliable estimate of generalization under distribution shifts than
empirical accuracy, which is dominated by majority groups.
Table 2 shows the results when providing DFR, Group DRO, P-ClArC, and RR-ClArC with ground-truth
group labels. In nearly all cases, applying the correction methods improved AGA, indicating an overall
enhancement in the ability to generalize across different data groups compared to the uncorrected students.
However, the magnitude of improvement varied substantially between methods. Non-XAI-based approaches,
particularly Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR), achieved only moderate gains in AGA. In contrast, the
XAI-based methods P-ClArC, RR-ClArC, and CFKD produced considerably larger improvements in most
settings. Except for asymmetric Camelyon17, the best-performing method on every dataset was one of these
XAI-based approaches. Among them, CFKD achieved the strongest results most consistently, reaching the
highest AGA in six out of nine cases and ranking second in two additional ones. It was also the only method
that substantially improved generalization on CelebA Blond, the dataset with arguably the most complex
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
0.0
0.5
1.0
Foreground Intensity
0.0
0.5
1.0
Background Intensity
Confounding feature only
True feature only
Train Samples
(a) symmetric Squares
0.0
0.5
1.0
Foreground Intensity
0.0
0.5
1.0
Background Intensity
Confounding feature only
True feature only
Train Samples
(b) asymmetric Squares
Figure 13: Decision boundaries and confidence regions of the uncorrected student models trained on (a)
symmetric and (b) asymmetric Squares. Training samples from Class A with low foreground intensity are
depicted as red triangles, training samples from Class B with high foreground intensity as blue triangles.
Likewise, new data in the red area is classified as Class A, and in the blue area as Class B. Color saturation
reflects the model’s confidence.
A perfect decision boundary would be a vertical line at 0.5 foreground
intensity, as that would separate the two classes by the true causal feature, rendering the model completely
insensible towards the confounder (the background intensity).
Due to Clever Hans, the actual decision
boundaries deviate heavily from the perfect solution in both cases.
confounder gender. RR-ClArC performed second best overall and surpassed CFKD on two datasets. Both
RR-ClArC and CFKD, however, failed to mitigate Clever Hans behavior on asymmetric Camelyon17, making
P-ClArC the only XAI-based method that improved performance on every dataset. The poor performance of
the XAI-based methods for asymmetric Camelyon17 led to DFR ranking best here, albeit its AGA increase
is smaller than for the symmetric version. DFR also performed relatively well on Follicles, likely due to the
larger size of the fine-tuning set.
The WGA results largely confirmed the findings for AGA. Again, XAI-based methods on average achieved
the highest scores, with CFKD ranking first and RR-ClArC second. P-ClArC and Group DRO were more
competitive in WGA than in AGA, but since model selection was based on AGA, this remains the primary
evaluation metric. We still report WGA for completeness, as an increase in AGA may occur without a
corresponding improvement in minority group performance or even with a decline. For example, applying
DFR to the student trained on symmetric CelebA Blond increased AGA but slightly reduced WGA. Because
no group was considered more important than another, an overall increase in mean group accuracy was
still regarded as an improvement.
In most cases, however, enhancements in AGA and WGA occurred
simultaneously.
Moreover, no clear pattern emerged to suggest that some correction methods perform systematically better
on either the symmetric or asymmetric dataset variants.
The effectiveness of each method varied, with
examples of stronger performance on both versions. Overall, the magnitude of improvement was largely
consistent between the two configurations. Although the final AGA for asymmetric datasets was typically
higher, this was proportional to the higher baseline AGA of the uncorrected student, resulting in a similar
net performance gain.
We conducted the same experiments again with group labels provided by SpRAy to assess how label quality
influences the correction performance, determining the robustness of each method to imperfect supervision.
The corresponding results are summarized in Table 3.
We do not report results for symmetric CelebA
Smiling, both symmetric and asymmetric CelebA Blond, as well as symmetric Camelyon17, because for
30
